<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd" [

<!ENTITY u5  "http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/">

]>

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>Jeremiah</title>
      <author><name reg="Smith, George Adam">George Adam Smith</name></author>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="1">Edition 1</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date>November 28, 2008</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">27351</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        Created electronically.
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
    </langUsage>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2008-11-28">November 28, 2008</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>
            Produced by Sigal Alon, Juliet Sutherland, John Hagerson, David King,
            and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt;.
        </name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
    .smallcaps       { font-variant: small-caps }
    .gesperrt        { font-style: italic }
  </pgStyleSheet>

  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>  </mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">Jeremiah</p>
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">Being The Baird Lecture for 1922</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">By</p>
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">George Adam Smith</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">New York</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">George H. Doran Company</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">1924</p>
    </div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>
  </front>
<body>

<pb n='v'/><anchor id='Pgv'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>Dedication.</head>

<p>
TO<lb/>
THE UNION<lb/>
OF<lb/>
THE SCOTTISH CHURCHES
</p>

</div>

<pb n='vii'/><anchor id='Pgvii'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>Preface.</head>

<p>
The purpose and the scope of this volume are
set forth in the beginning of Lecture I. Lecture
II. explains the various metrical forms in which I
understand Jeremiah to have delivered the most
of his prophecies, and which I have endeavoured,
however imperfectly, to reproduce in English.
Here it is necessary only to emphasise the variety
of these forms, the irregularities which are found
in them, and the occasional passage of the
Prophet from verse to prose and from prose to
verse, after the manner of some other bards or
rhapsodists of his race. The reader will keep in
mind that what appear as metrical irregularities
on the printed page would not be felt to be so
when sung or chanted; just as is the case with
the folk-songs of Palestine to-day. I am well
aware that metres so primitive and by our canons
so irregular have been more rhythmically rendered
by the stately prose of our English Versions;
yet it is our duty reverently to seek for the
<pb n='viii'/><anchor id='Pgviii'/>
original forms and melodies of what we believe
to be the Oracles of God. The only other point
connected with the metrical translations offered,
which need be mentioned here, is that I have
rendered the name of the God of Israel as it is
by the Greek and our own Versions&mdash;The Lord&mdash;which
is more suitable to English verse than
is either Yahweh or Jehovah.
</p>

<p>
The text of the Lectures and the footnotes
show how much I owe to those who have already
written on Jeremiah, as also in what details I
differ from one or another of them.
</p>

<p>
I have retained the form of Lectures for this
volume, but I have very much expanded and
added to what were only six Lectures of an hour
each when delivered under the auspices of the
Baird Trust in Glasgow in 1922.
</p>

<p>
George Adam Smith.<lb/>
<lb/>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Chanonry Lodge</hi>,<lb/>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Old Aberdeen</hi>,<lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>18th October, 1923.</hi>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='001'/><anchor id='Pg001'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>Preliminary.</head>

<p>
First of all, I thank the Baird Trustees for their
graceful appointment to this Lecture of a member
of what is still, though please God not for long,
another Church than their own. I am very grateful
for the privilege which they grant me of returning
to Glasgow with the accomplishment of
a work the materials for which were largely
gathered during the years of my professorship in
the city. The value of the opportunity is enhanced
by all that has since befallen our nation
and the world. The Great War invested the
experience of the Prophet, who is the subject of
this Lecture, with a fresh and poignant relevance
to our own problems and duties. Like ourselves,
Jeremiah lived through the clash not only of
empires but of opposite ethical ideals, through
the struggles and panics of small peoples, through
long and terrible fighting, famine, and slaughter
of the youth of the nations, with all the anxieties
to faith and the problems of Providence, which
such things naturally raise. Passionate for peace,
he was called to proclaim the inevitableness of
war, in opposition to the popular prophets of a
<pb n='002'/><anchor id='Pg002'/>
false peace; but later he had to counsel his
people to submit to their foes and to accept their
captivity, thus facing the hardest conflict a man
can who loves his own&mdash;between patriotism and
common sense, between his people's gallant efforts
for freedom and the stern facts of the world,
between national traditions and pieties on the
one side and on the other what he believed to
be the Will of God. These are issues which
the successive generations of our race are called
almost ceaselessly to face; and the teaching and
example of the great Prophet, who dealt with
them through such strenuous debates both with
his fellow-men and with his God, and who brought
out of these debates spiritual results of such
significance for the individual and for the nation,
cannot be without value for ourselves.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='003'/><anchor id='Pg003'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index="toc" level1="Lecture I. The Man And The Book."/>
<index index="pdf" level1="Lecture I."/>
<head type='sub'>Lecture I.</head>
<head>The Man And The Book.</head>

<p>
In this and the following lectures I attempt an
account and estimate of the Prophet Jeremiah, of
his life and teaching, and of the Book which contains
them&mdash;but especially of the man himself,
his personality and his tempers (there were more
than one), his religious experience and its achievements,
with the various high styles of their expression;
as well as his influence on the subsequent
religion of his people.
</p>

<p>
It has often been asserted that in Jeremiah's
ministry more than in any other of the Old
Covenant the personality of the Prophet was
under God the dominant factor, and one has even
said that <q>his predecessors were the originators
of great truths, which he transmuted into spiritual
life.</q><note place='foot'>A. B. Davidson.</note>
To avoid exaggeration here, we must keep
in mind how large a part personality played in
their teaching also, and from how deep in their
lives their messages sprang. Even Amos was no
mere <hi rend='italic'>voice crying in the wilderness</hi>. The discipline
of the desert, the clear eye for ordinary facts and
<pb n='004'/><anchor id='Pg004'/>
the sharp ear for sudden alarms which it breeds,
along with the desert shepherd's horror of the
extravagance and cruelties of civilisation&mdash;all
these reveal to us the Man behind the Book, who
had lived his truth before he uttered it. Hosea
again, tells the story of his outraged love as
<hi rend='italic'>the beginning of the Word of the Lord by him</hi>. And
it was the strength of Isaiah's character, which,
unaided by other human factors, carried Judah,
with the faith she enshrined, through the first
great crisis of her history. Yet recognise, as we
justly may, the personalities of these prophets in
the nerve, the colour, the accent, and even the
substance of their messages, we must feel the
still greater significance of Jeremiah's temperament
and other personal qualities both for his
own teaching and for the teaching of those who
came after him. Thanks to his loyal scribe,
Baruch, we know more of the circumstances of
his career, and thanks to his own frankness, we
know more of his psychology than we do in the
case of any of his predecessors. He has, too,
poured out his soul to us by the most personal
of all channels; the charm, passion and poignancy
of his verse lifting him high among the poets of
Israel.
</p>

<p>
So far as our materials enable us to judge no
other prophet was more introspective or concerned
about himself; and though it might be
said that he carried this concern to a fault, yet
<pb n='005'/><anchor id='Pg005'/>
fault or none, the fact is that no prophet started
so deeply from himself as Jeremiah did. His
circumstances flung him in upon his feelings and
convictions; he was constantly searching, doubting,
confessing, and pleading for, himself. He
asserted more strenuously than any except Job
his individuality as against God, and he stood in
more lonely opposition to his people.
</p>

<p>
Jeremiah was called to prophesy about the
time that the religion of Israel was re-codified in
Deuteronomy&mdash;the finest system of national religion
which the world has seen, but only and
exclusively national&mdash;and he was still comparatively
young when that system collapsed for
the time and the religion itself seemed about to
perish with it. He lived to see the Law fail, the
Nation dispersed, and the National Altar shattered;
but he gathered their fire into his bosom and
carried it not only unquenched but with a purer
flame towards its everlasting future. We may
say without exaggeration that what was henceforth
finest in the religion of Israel had, however
ancient its sources, been recast in the furnace of
his spirit. With him the human unit in religion
which had hitherto been mainly the nation was on
the way to become the individual. Personal piety
in later Israel largely grew out of his spiritual
struggles.<note place='foot'>A. B. Davidson. <q>Without
Jeremiah,</q> says Wellhausen, <q>the Psalms could not
have been composed.</q></note>
</p>

<pb n='006'/><anchor id='Pg006'/>

<p>
His forerunners, it is true, had insisted that
religion was an affair not of national institutions
nor of outward observance, but of the people's
heart&mdash;by which heart they and their hearers
must have understood the individual hearts composing
it. But, in urging upon his generation
repentance, faith and conversion to God, Jeremiah's
language is more thorough and personal
than that used by any previous prophet. The
individual, as he leaves Jeremiah's hands, is more
clearly the direct object of the Divine Interest
and Grace, and the instrument of the Divine Will.
The single soul is searched, defined and charged
as never before in Israel.
</p>

<p>
But this sculpture of the individual out of the
mass of the nation, this articulation of his immediate
relation to God apart from Law, Temple
and Race, achieved as it was by Jeremiah only
through intense mental and physical agonies,
opened to him the problem of the sufferings of
the righteous. In his experience the individual
realised his Self only to find that Self&mdash;its rights,
the truths given it and its best service for God&mdash;baffled
by the stupidity and injustice of those
for whom it laboured and agonised. The mists
of pain and failure bewildered the Prophet and to
the last his work seemed in vain. Whether or
not he himself was conscious of the solution of
the problem, others reached it through him.
There are grounds for believing that the Figure
<pb n='007'/><anchor id='Pg007'/>
of the Suffering Servant of the Lord, raised by
the Great Prophet of the Exile, and the idea of
the atoning and redemptive value of His sufferings
were, in part at least, the results of meditation
upon the spiritual loneliness on the one side, and
upon the passionate identification of himself with
the sorrows of his sinful people on the other, of
this the likest to Christ of all the prophets.<note place='foot'>Cp.
e.g. Jer. xi. 19, with Is. liii. 7; and see Grotius, <q>Annotata
ad Vetus Testamentum,</q> on Is. lii-liii; Cornill, <q>Das
Buch Jeremia erklärt,</q> pp. 11-12; John Skinner, <q>Prophecy and
Religion,</q> p. 351.</note>
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='stars: 5'/>

<p>
For our knowledge of this great life&mdash;there was
none greater under the Old Covenant&mdash;we are
dependent on that Book of our Scriptures, the
Hebrew text of which bears the simple title
<q>Jeremiah.</q>
</p>

<p>
The influence of the life and therefore the full
stature of the man who lived it, stretches, as I
have hinted, to the latest bounds of Hebrew
history, and many writings and deeds were
worshipfully assigned to him. Thus the Greek
Version of the Old Testament ascribes Lamentations
to Jeremiah, but the poems themselves do
not claim to be, and obviously are not, from
himself. He is twice quoted in II. Chronicles
and once in Ezra, but these quotations may be
reasonably interpreted as referring to prophecies
contained in our book, which were therefore
<pb n='008'/><anchor id='Pg008'/>
extant before the date of the Chronicler.<note place='foot'>II.
Chron. xxxvi. 21 (with a reference to Lev. xxvi. 34, 35)
and 22, 23, the latter repeated in Ezra i. 1-2. Duhm, indeed,
but on insufficient grounds, thinks the former citation, because
of its reference to Leviticus, cannot be from our Book of Jeremiah
but is from a Midrash unknown to us; yet the chronicler's
was the very spirit to associate a Levitical provision with Jer.
xxix. 10; cp. xxv. 9-12. The other quotation Duhm refers to
some part of Is. xl. ff. (xliv. 28?) as though this had at one time
been attributed to Jeremiah.</note> Ecclesiasticus
XLIX. 6-7 reflects passages of our Book,
and of Lamentations, as though equally Jeremiah's,
and Daniel IX. 2 refers to Jeremiah XXV.
12. A paragraph in the Second Book of Maccabees,
Ch. II. 1-8, contains, besides echoes of
our Book of Jeremiah, references to other activities
of the Prophet of which the sources and the value
are unknown to us. But all these references, as
well as the series of apocryphal and apocalyptic
works to which the name either of Jeremiah himself
or of Baruch, his scribe, has been attached,<note place='foot'>In
the Apocrypha proper, (1) <q>Baruch</q> to which is attached
(2) <q>The Epistle of Jeremy</q> warning the Jews of Babylon in
general and conventional terms against idolatry. Apocalyptic
writings, (3) <q>Apocalypse of Baruch,</q> (4) (5) and (6) three other
<q>Apocalypses of Baruch,</q> (7) <q>The Rest of the Words of
Baruch,</q> or <q>Paralipomena Jeremiæ,</q> (8) <q>Prophecy of Jeremiah.</q>
For particulars of these see <q>Encyclopædia Biblica,</q>
arts. <q>Apocalyptic Literature</q> (R. H. Charles), and <q>Apocrypha</q>
(M. R. James).</note>
only reveal the length of the shadow which the
Prophet's figure cast down the ages, and contribute
<pb n='009'/><anchor id='Pg009'/>
no verifiable facts to our knowledge of his
career or of his spiritual experience.
</p>

<p>
For the actual life of Jeremiah, for the man as
he was to himself and his contemporaries, for his
origin, character, temper, struggles, growth and
modes of expression, we have practically no
materials beyond the Canonical Book to which
his name is prefixed.<note place='foot'>Following Hitzig,
C. J. Ball (<q>The Prophecies of Jeremiah</q>
in <q>The Expositor's Bible,</q> 1890, pp. 10 ff.) refers Pss. xxiii,
xxvi-xxviii to Jeremiah, and it is possible that in particular the
personal experiences in Ps. xxvii are reflections of those of
the prophet. But such experiences were so common in the
history of the prophets and saints of Israel as to render the
reference precarious.</note>
</p>

<p>
Roughly classified the contents of the Book
(after the extended title in Ch. I. 1-3) are as
follows:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
1. A Prologue, Ch. I. 4-19, in which the Prophet
tells the story of his call and describes the range
of his mission as including both his own people
and foreign nations. The year of his call was
627-6 <hi rend='smallcaps'>B.C.</hi>
</p>

<p>
2. A large number of Oracles, dialogues between
the Prophet and the Deity and symbolic
actions by the Prophet issuing in Oracles, mostly
introduced as by Jeremiah himself, but sometimes
reported of him by another. Most of the Oracles
are in verse; the style of the rest is not distinguishable
by us from prose. They deal almost
<pb n='010'/><anchor id='Pg010'/>
exclusively with the Prophet's own people though
there are some references to neighbouring tribes.
The bulk of this class of the contents is found
within Chs. II-XXV, which contain all the
earlier oracles, i.e. those uttered by Jeremiah
before the death of King Josiah in 608, but also
several of his prophecies under Jehoiakim and
even Ṣedekiah. More of the latter are found
within Chs. XXVII-XXXV: all these, except
XXVIII and part of XXXII, which are introduced
by the Prophet himself, are reported by another.
</p>

<p>
3. A separate group of Oracles on Foreign
Nations, Chs. XLVI-LI, reported to us as
Jeremiah's.
</p>

<p>
4. A number of narratives of episodes in the
Prophet's life from 608 onwards under Jehoiakim
and Ṣedekiah to the end in Egypt, soon after
586; apparently by a contemporary and eyewitness
who on good grounds is generally taken to be
Baruch the Scribe: Chs. XXVI, XXXVI-XLV;
but to the same source may be due much of Chs.
XXVII-XXXV (see under 2).
</p>

<p>
5. Obvious expansions and additions throughout
all the foregoing; and a historical appendix in
Ch. LII, mainly an excerpt from II. Kings XXIV-XXV.
</p>

<p>
On the face of it, then, the Book is a compilation
from several sources; and perhaps we ought
to translate the opening clause of its title not as
in our versions <q>The Words of Jeremiah,</q> but
<pb n='011'/><anchor id='Pg011'/>
<q>The History of Jeremiah,</q> as has been legitimately
done by some scholars since Kimchi.
</p>

<p>
What were the nuclei of this compilation?
How did they originate? What proofs do they
give of their value as historical documents? How
did they come together? And what changes, if
any, did they suffer before the compilation closed
and the Book received its present form?
</p>

<p>
These questions must be answered, so far as
possible, before we can give an account of the
Prophet's life or an estimate of himself and his
teaching. The rest of this lecture is an attempt
to answer them&mdash;but in the opposite order to that
in which I have just stated them. We shall work
backward from the two ultimate forms in which
the Book has come down to us. For these forms
are two.
</p>

<p>
Besides the Hebrew text, from which the
Authorised and Revised English Versions have
been made, we possess a form of the Book in
Greek, which is part of the Greek Version of the
Old Testament known as the Septuagint. This
is virtually another edition of the same work.
The Hebrew text belongs to the Second or
Prophetical Canon of the Jewish Scriptures, which
was not closed till about 200 <hi rend='smallcaps'>B.C.</hi>, or more than
350 years after Jeremiah's death. The Greek
Version was completed about the same time, and
possibly earlier.
</p>

<p>
These two editions of the Book hold by far the
<pb n='012'/><anchor id='Pg012'/>
greatest part of their contents in common, yet
they differ considerably in the amount and in
the arrangement of their contents, and somewhat
less in the dates and personal references which
they apply to various passages. We have thus
before us two largely independent witnesses who
agree in the bulk of their testimony, and otherwise
correct and supplement each other.
</p>

<p>
In size the Greek Book of Jeremiah is but
seven-eighths of the Hebrew,<note place='foot'>It has been
calculated that the Greek has 2700 words fewer
than the Hebrew, i.e. about 120 verses or from four to five
average chapters.</note> but conversely it
contains some hundred words that the Hebrew
lacks. Part of this small Greek surplus is due to
the translators' expansion or paraphrase of briefer
Hebrew originals, or consists of glosses that
they found in the Hebrew MSS. from which they
translated, or added of themselves; the rest is
made up of what are probably original phrases
but omitted from the Hebrew by the carelessness
of copyists; yet none of these differences is of
importance save where the Greek corrects an
irregularity in the Hebrew metre, or yields sense
when the Hebrew fails to do so.<note place='foot'>E.g.
ii. 19, 29; iii. 1; v. 4<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>; viii.
16, 21; xxxii. 12, etc.</note>
</p>

<p>
More instructive is the greater number of
phrases and passages found in the Hebrew Book,
and consequently in our English Versions, but absent
from the Greek. Some, it is true, are merely
<pb n='013'/><anchor id='Pg013'/>
formal&mdash;additions to a personal name of the title
<hi rend='italic'>king</hi> or <hi rend='italic'>prophet</hi>
or of the names of a father and
grandfather, or the more frequent use of the divine
title <hi rend='italic'>of Hosts</hi> with the personal Name of the Deity
or of the phrase <hi rend='italic'>Rede of the
Lord</hi>.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>nĕ'um Yahweh: utterance</hi>
or <hi rend='italic'>oracle</hi> of <hi rend='italic'>Jehovah</hi>.</note>
Also the Greek omits words which in the Hebrew are obviously
mistakes of a copyist.<note place='foot'>E.g. the words
<hi rend='italic'>at his mouth</hi>, xxxvi. 17; xxxviii. 16.</note>
Again, a number of what
are transparent glosses or marginal notes on the
Hebrew text are lacking in the Greek, because
the translator of the latter did not find them on
the Hebrew manuscript from which he translated.<note place='foot'>E.g.
<hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi> in viii. 5, and in xxxvi. 22
<hi rend='italic'>the ninth month</hi>.</note>
Some titles to sections of the Book, or portions of
titles, absent from the Greek but found in our
Hebrew text, are also later editorial additions.<note place='foot'>E.g.
ii. 1-2; xxv. 1<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>; xxvii. 1; xlvii. 1; l. 1.</note>
Greater importance, however, attaches to those
phrases that cannot be mere glosses and to the
longer passages, wanting in the Greek but found
in the Hebrew, many of which upon internal evidence
must be regarded as late intrusions into
the latter.<note place='foot'>E.g. viii. 10<hi rend='italic'>ab</hi>-12;
x. 6-8; xi. 7, 8; xvii. 1-4 (perhaps
omitted by the Greek, because partly given already in xv. 13,
14); xxv. 18 <hi rend='italic'>and a curse as at this day</hi>;
xxvii. 1, 7, 12<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>, 13,
14<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>, 17, 18<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>, clauses
in 19, 20, the whole of 21, and 22<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>; xxix.
14, 16-20; xxx. 10, 11 (= xlvi. 27 f.), 15<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>, 22; xxxiii. 14-26;
xxxix. 4-13; xvi. 26; xlvii. 1 (except <hi rend='italic'>to
the Philistines</hi>); xlviii. 45-47; lii. 28-30.</note>
And occasionally a word or phrase
<pb n='014'/><anchor id='Pg014'/>
in the Hebrew, which spoils the rhythm or is
irrelevant to the sense, is not found in the
Greek.<note place='foot'>E.g. i. 10, 17, 18;
ii. 17, 19; vii. 28<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>; xii. 3; xiv. 4, etc.</note>
</p>

<p>
Finally, there is one great difference of arrangement.
The group of Oracles on Foreign
Nations which appear in the Hebrew as Chs.
XLVI-LI are in the Greek placed between verses
13 and 15<note place='foot'>Verse 14 is not found in
the Greek.</note> of Ch. XXV, and are ranged in a
different order&mdash;an obvious proof that at one
time different editors felt free to deal with the
arrangement of the compilation as well as to add
to its contents.<note place='foot'><p>In his Schweich
Lectures on <q>The Septuagint and Jewish
Worship</q> (for the British Academy, 1921) Mr. St. John
Thackeray presents clear evidence from the different vocabularies
in the Greek Version that this Version was the work of
two translators, the division between whom is at Ch. xxix.
verse 7. The dividing line cuts across the Greek arrangement
of the chapters, which sets the Oracles on Foreign Nations in
the centre of the Book. This shows that it was not the translators
who placed them there, but that the translators found the
arrangement in the Hebrew MS. from which they translated.
Further, he thinks that the division of the Book into two parts
was not made by the translators, but already existed in their
Hebrew exemplar. For this the Hebrew text gives two evidences:
(1) the titles of the Oracles, (2) the colophons appended
to two of them. The titles are some long, some short.
In the Hebrew order the Oracles with long titles are mixed up
with those with short, but in the Greek order the six with long
titles come together first and are followed by the five with short.
There are two colophons&mdash;one to the Moab Oracle, the other to
the Babylon Oracle; but the Moab Oracle stands last in the
Greek order and the Babylon Oracle last in the Hebrew order.
</p>
<p>
From all this two conclusions are drawn: (1) when the titles
were inserted the chapters were arranged as in the Greek,
which, therefore, was the original arrangement; (2) they afford
Hebrew evidence for a break or interruption in the middle of
the Oracles&mdash;the longer titles cease about the end of Part I of
the Greek Version, which therefore follows a division of the
Book into two parts that already existed in the Hebrew original
from which it was made. The Hebrew editor who amplified
the titles had apparently only Part I before him.
</p></note>
</p>

<pb n='015'/><anchor id='Pg015'/>

<p>
Modern critics differ as to the comparative
value of these two editions of the Book of Jeremiah,
and there are strong advocates on either
side.<note place='foot'>E.g. Graf (<q>Der Prophet J.
erklärt,</q> 1862), George Douglas
(<q>The Book of Jeremiah,</q> 1903) for the Hebrew; and Workman
(<q>The Text of Jeremiah,</q> 1888) for the Greek. For a
judicial comparison of the two editions, resulting much in favour
of the Greek, see W. R. Smith, <q>The O.T. in the Jewish
Church,</q> Lectures IV and V.</note> But
the prevailing opinion, and, to my
view, the right one, is that no general judgment
is possible, and that each case of difference
between the two witnesses must be decided by
itself.<note place='foot'><q>The Hebrew is
qualitatively superior to the Greek, but
quantitatively the Greek is nearer the original. This judgment
is general, admitting many exceptions, and each passage has to
be considered by itself.</q>&mdash;A. B. Davidson. Cp. Duhm, <q>Das
Buch Jer.,</q> p. xxii.</note> With this, however, we have nothing at
present to do. What concerns us now is the fact
that the Greek is not the translation of the
canonical Hebrew text, but that the two Books,
<pb n='016'/><anchor id='Pg016'/>
while sharing a common basis of wide extent,
represent two different lines of compilation and
editorial development which continued till at least
200 <hi rend='smallcaps'>B.C.</hi> Between them they are the proof that,
while our Bible was still being compiled, some
measure of historical criticism and of editorial
activity was at work on the material&mdash;and this
not only along one line. We need not stop to
discuss how far the fact justifies the exercise of
criticism by the modern Church. For our present
purpose it is enough to keep in mind that our
Book of Jeremiah is the result of a long development
through some centuries and on more than
one line, though the two divergent movements
started with, and carried down, a large body of
material in common.
</p>

<p>
Moreover, this common material bears evidence
of having already undergone similar treatment,
<emph>before</emph> it passed out on those two lines
of further development which resulted in the
canonical Hebrew text and the Greek Version
respectively. The signs of gradual compilation
are everywhere upon the material which they
share in common. Now and then a chronological
order appears, and indeed there are traces of a
purpose to pursue that order throughout. But
this has been disturbed by cross-arrangements
according to subject,<note place='foot'>Oracles on
the King, xxii. 1-xxiii. 8 and on the Prophets,
xxiii. 9-40.</note> and by the intrusion of
<pb n='017'/><anchor id='Pg017'/>
later oracles and episodes among earlier ones<note place='foot'>The
Oracles under Jehoiakim, chs. vii-x, before those on
the enforcement of Deuteronomy under Josiah xi. 6-8.</note> or
<hi rend='italic'>vice versa</hi><note place='foot'>The Oracle for
Baruch, dated in the fourth year of Jehoiakim,
604 <hi rend='smallcaps'>B.C.</hi>, is not given till ch. xlv, a long way off from ch.
xxxvi to which it belongs by date and subject, and only
after chs. xl-xliv, the story of Jeremiah's life after the fall of
Jerusalem.</note> as if their materials had come into the
hands of the compilers or editors of the Book
only gradually. Another proof of the gradual
growth of those contents, which are common to the
Hebrew and the Greek, is the fashion in which they
tend to run away from the titles prefixed to them.
Take the title to the whole Book,<note place='foot'>So far
as it is common to the Hebrew and the Greek.</note>
Ch. I. 2, <hi rend='italic'>Which
was the Word of the Lord to Jeremiah in the days of
Josiah, son of Amon, King of Judah, in the thirteenth
year of his reign</hi>. This covers only the narrative
of the Prophet's call in Ch. I, or at most a few
of the Oracles in the following chapters. The
supplementary title in verse 3&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>It came also in the
days of Jehoiakim, the son of Josiah, King of Judah,
up to [the end of]<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The end
of</hi> is wanting in the Greek.</note> the eleventh year of Ṣedekiah, the
son of Josiah King of Judah, up to the exile of Jerusalem,
in the fifth month</hi>&mdash;is probably a later addition,
added when the later Oracles of Jeremiah were
attached to some collection of those which he
had delivered under Josiah; but even then the
title fails to cover those words in the Book which
<pb n='018'/><anchor id='Pg018'/>
Jeremiah spake after Jerusalem had gone into
exile, and even after he had been hurried down
into Egypt by a base remnant of his people.<note place='foot'>Chs.
xl-xliv. And between them the title and its supplement
ignore the Oracles which Jeremiah uttered under Josiah
after the thirteenth year of the King, perhaps iii. 6-18, and
certainly xi. 1-5, 6-8.</note>
Moreover, the historical appendix to the Book
carries the history it contains on to 561 <hi rend='smallcaps'>B.C.</hi> at
least.<note place='foot'>Ch. lii.</note> Again there are passages, the subjects of
which are irrelevant to their context, and which
break the clear connection of the parts of the
context between which they have intruded.<note place='foot'>E.g. iii.
6-18; ix. 23-26 with x. 1-16; xxi. 11-12 with
(probably) 13-14.</note>
The shorter sentences, that also disturb the connection
as they stand, appear to have been
written originally as marginal notes which a
later editor or copyist has incorporated in the
text.<note place='foot'>E.g. ii. 26; v. 13; x. 11,
the last written in Aramaic.</note>
To this class, too, may belong those brief
passages which appear twice, once in their natural
connection in some later chapter and once out of
their natural connection in some earlier chapter.<note place='foot'>Cp.
xxiii. 7, 8 with xvi. 14, 15, and xxx. 23, 24 with xxiii.
19, 20.</note>
And again in VII. 1-28 and XXVI. 1-9 we have
two accounts, apparently from different hands,
of what may or may not be the same episode in
Jeremiah's ministry.
</p>

<pb n='019'/><anchor id='Pg019'/>

<p>
These data clearly prove that not only from
the time when the Hebrew and Greek editions
of the Book started upon their separate lines of
development, but from the very beginnings of
the Book's history, the work of accumulation, arrangement
and re-arrangement, with other editorial
processes, had been busy upon it.
</p>

<p>
The next question is, have we any criteria by
which to discriminate between the elements in the
Book that belong either to Jeremiah himself or
to his contemporaries and others that are due to
editors or compilers between his death soon after
586 and the close of the Prophetic Canon in
200 <hi rend='smallcaps'>B.C.</hi>? The answer is that we have such
criteria. All Oracles or Narratives in the Book,
which (apart from obvious intrusions) imply that
the Exile is well advanced or that the Return
from Exile has already happened, or which reflect
the circumstances of the later Exile and
subsequent periods or the spirit of Israel and the
teaching of her prophets and scribes in those
periods, we may rule out of the material on
which we can rely for our knowledge of Jeremiah's
life and his teaching. Of such Exilic and
post-Exilic contents there is a considerable, but
not a preponderant, amount. These various
items break into their context, their style and
substance are not conformable to the style and
substance of the Oracles, which (as we shall see)
are reasonably attributed to Jeremiah, but they
<pb n='020'/><anchor id='Pg020'/>
so closely resemble those of other writings from
the eve of the Return from Exile or from after
the Return that they seem to be based on the
latter. In any case they reflect the situation and
feelings of Israel in Babylonia about 540 <hi rend='smallcaps'>B.C.</hi>
Some find place in our Book among the earlier
Oracles of Jeremiah,<note place='foot'>x. 1-16; xvii. 19-27 (on the
Sabbath&mdash;unlike Jeremiah, who did not lay stress on single laws but very
like post-exilic teaching, e.g. Neh. xiii and Is. lviii), possibly xxiii. 1-8; xxv.
12-14 (the obviously late <hi rend='italic'>as at this day</hi> in verse 18 and
verse 26<hi rend='italic'>b</hi> are omitted by the Greek).</note> others in his
later,<note place='foot'>Parts of xxx and xxxi, especially xxxi. 7-14, the spirit of
which is so much that of the Eve of the Return from Exile and
the style so akin to that of the Great Prophet of that Eve that
some take it as dependent on his prophecies.</note> but the
most in the group of Oracles on Foreign Nations.<note place='foot'>xlvi-li,
especially on Moab, xlviii. 40-47, which is based
on the earlier prophecy, Is. xv-xvi; on Edom, xlix. 7-22,
based on Obadiah; Elam, xlix. 34-39; and the long prophecy
on Babylon, l. 1-58, which reflects like Is. xl. ff. the historical
situation just before the Medes overthrew Babylon, and
expresses an attitude towards the latter very different from
Jeremiah's own fifty years earlier. The compiler, or an editor of
the Book, has (li. 60) erred in attributing this long prophecy to
Jeremiah. In all these there may be genuine nuclei.</note>
And, finally, there are the long extracts from the
Second Book of Kings, bringing, as I have said,
the history down to at least 561.<note place='foot'>Ch. lii.</note>
</p>

<p>
All these, then, we lay aside, so far as our search
for Jeremiah himself and his doctrine is concerned,
<pb n='021'/><anchor id='Pg021'/>
and we do so the more easily that they are
largely devoid of the style and the spiritual value
of his undoubted Oracles and Discourses. They
are more or less diffuse and vagrant, while his
are concise and to the point. They do not reveal,
as his do, a man fresh from agonising debates
with God upon the poverty of his qualifications
for the mission to which God calls him, or upon
the contents of that mission, or upon his own
sufferings and rights; nor do they recount his
adventures with his contemporaries. They are
not the outpourings of a single soul but rather
the expression of the feelings of a generation or
of the doctrines of a school. We have in our
Bible other and better utterances of the truths,
questions, threats and hopes which they contain.
</p>

<p>
But once more&mdash;in what remains of the Book,
what belongs to Jeremiah himself or to his time,
we have again proofs of compilation from more
sources than one. Some of this is in verse&mdash;among
the finest in the Old Testament&mdash;some in
prose orations; some in simple narrative. Some
Oracles are introduced by the Prophet himself,
and he utters them in the first person, some are
reported of him by others. And any chronological
or topical order lasts only through groups of
prophecies or narratives. Fortunately, however,
included among these are more than one account
of how the writing of them and the collection of
them came about.
</p>

<pb n='022'/><anchor id='Pg022'/>

<p>
In 604-603 <hi rend='smallcaps'>B.C.</hi>, twenty-one, or it may have been
twenty-three, years after Jeremiah had begun to
prophesy, the history of Western Asia rose to a
crisis. Pharaoh Nĕcoh who had marched north
to the Euphrates was defeated in a battle for
empire by Nebuchadrezzar, son of the King
of Babylon. From the turmoil of nations which
filled the period Babylon emerged as that
executioner of the Divine judgments on the
world, whom Jeremiah since 627 or 625 had been
describing generally as <hi rend='italic'>out of the North</hi>. His
predictions were justified, and he was able to put
a sharper edge on them. Henceforth in place of
the <hi rend='italic'>enemy from the North</hi> Jeremiah could speak
definitely of the <hi rend='italic'>King of Babylon</hi> and of his
people <hi rend='italic'>the Chaldeans</hi>.
</p>

<p>
In Ch. XXV we read accordingly that in that
year, 604-3, he delivered to the people of Jerusalem
a summary of his previous oracles. He told them
that the cup of the Lord's wrath was given into
his hand; Judah and other nations, especially
Egypt, must drink it and so stagger to their doom.
</p>

<p>
But a spoken and a summary discourse was not
enough. Like Amos and Isaiah, Jeremiah was
moved to commit his previous Oracles to writing.
In Ch. XXXVI is a narrative presumably by
an eyewitness of the transactions it recounts, and
this most probably the scribe who was associated
with the Prophet in these transactions. Jeremiah
was commanded to <hi rend='italic'>take a roll of a book and write on
<pb n='023'/><anchor id='Pg023'/>
it all the words which</hi> the Lord <hi rend='italic'>had spoken to him
concerning Jerusalem<note place='foot'>So Greek,
Hebrew has <hi rend='italic'>Israel</hi>.</note> and Judah and all the nations
from the day</hi> the Lord first <hi rend='italic'>spake to him, in the days
of Josiah, even unto this day</hi>. For this purpose he
employed Baruch, the son of Neriah, afterwards
designated the Scribe, and Baruch wrote on the
Roll to his dictation. Being unable himself to
enter the Temple he charged Baruch to go there
and to read the Roll on a fast-day <hi rend='italic'>in the ears of all
the people of Judah who have come in from their cities</hi>.
Baruch found his opportunity in the following
December, and read the Roll from the New Gate
of the Temple to the multitude. This was
reported to some of the princes in the Palace
below, who sent for Baruch and had him read
the Roll over to them. Divided between alarm at
its contents and their duty to the king, they sent
Jeremiah and Baruch into hiding while they made
report to Jehoiakim. The king had the Roll read
out once more to himself as he sat in his room in
front of a lighted brasier, for it was winter. The
reading incensed him, and as the reader finished
each three or four columns he cut them up
and threw them on the fire till the whole was
consumed. But Jeremiah, in safe hiding with
Baruch, took another Roll and dictated again the
contents of the first; <hi rend='italic'>and there were added besides
unto them many like words</hi>.
</p>

<pb n='024'/><anchor id='Pg024'/>

<p>
The story has been questioned, but by very
few, and on no grounds that are perceptible
to common sense. One critic imagines that it
ascribes miraculous power to the Prophet in <q>its
natural impression that the Prophet reproduces
from memory and dictates all the words which the
Lord has spoken to him.</q><note place='foot'>N. Schmidt in
the <q>Encyclopædia Biblica.</q></note> There is no trace of
miracle in the story. It is a straight tale of
credible transactions, very natural (as we have
seen) at the crisis which the Prophet had reached.
No improbability infects it, no reflection of a later
time, no idealising as by a writer at a distance
from the events he recounts. On the contrary it
gives a number of details which only a contemporary
could have supplied. Nor can we
forget the power and accuracy of an Oriental's
memory, especially at periods when writing
was not a common practice.
</p>

<p>
There is, of course, more room for difference
of opinion as to the contents of each of the successive
Rolls, and as to how much of these contents
is included in our Book of Jeremiah. But
to such questions the most probable answer is
as follows.
</p>

<p>
There cannot have been many of the Prophet's
previous Oracles on the first Roll. This was read
three times over in the same day and was probably
limited to such Oracles as were sufficient for its
<pb n='025'/><anchor id='Pg025'/>
practical purpose of moving the people of Judah
to repentance at a Fast, when their hearts would
be most inclined that way. But when the first
Roll was destroyed, the immediate occasion for
which it was written was past, and the second Roll
would naturally have a wider aim. It repeated
the first, but in view of the additions to it seems
to have been dictated with the purpose of giving
a permanent form to <emph>all</emph> the fruits of Jeremiah's
previous ministry. The battle of Carchemish had
confirmed his predictions and put edge upon
them. The destruction of the Jewish people was
imminent and the Prophet's own life in danger.
His enforced retirement along with Baruch lent
him freedom to make a larger selection, if not the
full tale, of his previous prophecies. Hence the
phrase <hi rend='italic'>there were added many words like</hi> those on
the first Roll.<note place='foot'>Professor Schmidt, in the
article already quoted, takes this to mean only that Jeremiah
<q>retouched under fresh provocation</q> the contents of the first
Roll. This interpretation would imply that <hi rend='italic'>words</hi>
means nouns, verbs, adjectives and so forth, whereas <hi rend='italic'>words</hi>
can only carry the same sense as it carries in the rest of the Book, viz.
<emph>whole</emph> Oracles or Discourses. Note the phrase
<hi rend='italic'>words like them</hi>, viz. like <hi rend='italic'>the words</hi>
or Oracles on the first Roll.</note>
</p>

<p>
If such a Roll as the second existed in the care
of Baruch then the use of it in the compilation of
our Book of Jeremiah is extremely probable, and
the probability is confirmed by some features of the
Book. Among the Oracles which can be assigned
<pb n='026'/><anchor id='Pg026'/>
to Jeremiah's activity before the fourth year of
Jehoiakim there is on the whole more fidelity to
chronological order than in those which were
delivered later, and while the former are nearly
all given without narrative attached to them, and
are reported as from Jeremiah himself in the first
person, the latter for the most part are embedded
in narratives, in which he appears in the third
person.<note place='foot'>Cp. A. B. Davidson, <q>Jeremiah,</q>
in Hastings, <q>B.D.,</q> ii. 522.</note>
</p>

<p>
Further let us note that if some of the Oracles
in the earlier part of the Book&mdash;after the account
of the Prophet's call&mdash;are undated, while the dates
of others are stated vaguely; and again, if some,
including the story of the call, appear to be tinged
with reflections from experiences of the Prophet
later than the early years of his career, then
these two features support the belief that the
Oracles were first reduced to writing at a distance
from their composition and first delivery&mdash;a belief
in harmony with the theory of their inclusion
and preservation in the Prophet's <emph>second</emph> Roll.
</p>

<p>
Let us now turn to the biographical portions
of the Book. We have proved the trustworthiness
of Ch. XXXVI as the narrative of an eyewitness,
in all probability Baruch the Scribe, who for the
first time is introduced to us. But if Baruch wrote
Ch. XXXVI it is certain that a great deal more
of the biographical matter in the Book is from
<pb n='027'/><anchor id='Pg027'/>
his hand. This is couched in the same style; it
contains likewise details which a later writer could
hardly have invented, and it is equally free from
those efforts to idealise events and personalities,
by which later writers betray their distance from
the subjects of which they treat. It is true that,
as an objector remarks, <q>the Book does not
contain a single line that claims to be written by
Baruch.</q><note place='foot'>Schmidt, <hi rend='italic'>op.
cit.</hi></note> But this is evidence rather for, than
against, Baruch's authorship. Most of the biographical
portions of the Old Testament are
anonymous. It was later ages that fixed names to
Books as they have fixed Baruch's own to certain
apocryphal works. Moreover, the suppression of
his name by this scribe is in harmony with the
modest manner in which he appears throughout,
as though he had taken to heart Jeremiah's words
to him: <hi rend='italic'>Seekest thou great things for thyself? Seek
them not. Only thy life will I give thee for a prey in
all places whither thou goest.</hi><note place='foot'>xlv.
5.</note> But there is still more
conclusive evidence. That Baruch had not been
associated with Jeremiah before 603-4 is a fair
inference from the fact that the Prophet had to
dictate to him all his previous Oracles. Now it is
striking that up to that year and the introduction
of Baruch as Jeremiah's scribe, we have few
narratives of the Prophet's experience and activity&mdash;being
left in ignorance as to the greater part of
his life under Josiah&mdash;and that these few narratives&mdash;of
<pb n='028'/><anchor id='Pg028'/>
his call, of his share in the propagation of
Deuteronomy, of the plot of the men of Anathoth
against him, of his symbolic action with his waist-cloth,
and of his visit to the house of the Potter&mdash;are
(except in the formal titles to some of them)
told in the first person by Jeremiah himself,<note place='foot'>Chs.
i., xi., 1-8, 18-xii. 6; xiii. 1-17; xviii. 1-12.</note>
while from 604-3 onwards the biographical
narratives are much more numerous and, except
in three of them,<note place='foot'>Chs. xxiv, xxviii, xxxii
(except for the introductory verses 1-5).</note>
the Prophet appears only in
the third person. This coincidence of the first
appearance of Baruch as the Prophet's associate
with the start of a numerous series of narratives
of the Prophet's life in which he appears in the
third person can hardly be accidental.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='stars: 5'/>

<p>
Such, then, are the data which the Book of
Jeremiah offers for the task of determining the
origins and authenticity of its very diverse contents.
After our survey of them, those of you
who are ignorant of the course of recent criticism
will not be surprised to learn that virtual agreement
now exists on certain main lines, while great
differences of opinion continue as to details&mdash;differences
perhaps irreconcilable. It is agreed
that the book is the result of a long and a slow
growth, stretching far beyond Jeremiah's time,
<pb n='029'/><anchor id='Pg029'/>
out of various sources; and that these sources are
in the main three:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
A. Collections of genuine Oracles and Discourses
of Jeremiah&mdash;partly made by himself.
</p>

<p>
B. Narratives of his life and times by a contemporary
writer or writers, the principal, if not
the only, contributor to which is (in the opinion
of most) the Scribe Baruch.
</p>

<p>
C. Exilic and Post-Exilic additions in various
forms: long prophecies and narratives; shorter
pieces included among the Prophet's own Oracles;
and scattered titles, dates, notes and glosses.
</p>

<p>
Moreover, there is also general agreement as to
which of these classes a very considerable number
of the sections of the Book belong to. There is not,
and cannot be, any doubt about the bulk of those
which are apparently exilic or post-exilic. It is
equally certain that a large number of the Oracles
are Jeremiah's own, and that the most of the
Narratives are from his time and trustworthy. But
questions have been raised and are still receiving
opposite answers as to whether or not some of the
Oracles and Narratives have had their original
matter coloured or expanded by later hands; or
have even in whole been foisted upon the Prophet
or his contemporary biographer from legendary
sources.
</p>

<p>
Of these questions some, however they be
answered, so little affect our estimates of the
Prophet and his teaching that we may leave them
<pb n='030'/><anchor id='Pg030'/>
alone. But there are at least four of them on the
answers to which does depend the accurate
measure of the stature of Jeremiah as a man and
a prophet, of the extent and variety of his gifts
and interests, of the simplicity or complexity of
his temperament, and of his growth, and of his
teaching through his long ministry of over forty
years.
</p>

<p>
These four questions are
</p>

<quote rend="display">
(1) The authenticity of the account of his call
in Ch. I.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
(2) The authenticity of the account of his support
of the promulgation of Deuteronomy,
the Old Covenant, in Ch. XI.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
(3) The authenticity of his Oracle on the New
Covenant in Ch. XXXI.
</quote>

<quote rend="display">
(4) And an even larger question&mdash;Whether
indeed any of the prose Oracles attributed
to him in the Book are his, or
whether we must confine ourselves to
the passages in verse as alone his genuine
deliverances?
</quote>

<p>
The first three of these questions we may leave
for discussion to their proper places in our survey
of his ministry. The fourth is even more fundamental
to our judgment both of the Book and of
the Man; and I shall deal with it in the introduction
to the next lecture on <q>The Poet Jeremiah.</q>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='031'/><anchor id='Pg031'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index="toc" level1="Lecture II. The Poet."/>
<index index="pdf" level1="Lecture II."/>
<head type='sub'>Lecture II.</head>
<head>The Poet.</head>

<p>
From last lecture I left over to this the discussion
of a literary question, the answer to which is
fundamental to our understanding both of the
Book and of the Man, but especially of the Man.
</p>

<p>
The Book of Jeremiah has come to us with all
its contents laid down as prose, with no metrical
nor musical punctuation; not divided into <hi rend='italic'>stichoi</hi>
or poetical lines nor marked off into stanzas or
strophes. Yet many passages read as metrically,
and are as musical in sound, and in spirit as poetic
as the Psalms, the Canticles, or the Lamentations.
Their language bears the marks that usually distinguish
verse from prose in Hebrew as in other
literatures. It beats out with a more or less
regular proportion of stresses or heavy accents.
It diverts into an order of words different from the
order normal in prose. Sometimes it is elliptic,
sometimes it contains particles unnecessary to the
meaning&mdash;both signs of an attempt at metre.
Though almost constantly unrhymed, it carries
alliteration and assonance to a degree beyond what
is usual in prose, and prefers forms of words more
<pb n='032'/><anchor id='Pg032'/>
sonorous than the ordinary. But these many and
distinct passages of poetry issue from and run into
contexts of prose unmistakable. For two reasons
we are not always able to trace the exact border
between the prose and the verse&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>first</hi> because of
the frequent uncertainties of the text, and <hi rend='italic'>second</hi>
because the prose, like most of that of the prophets,
has often a rhythm approximating to metre. And
thus it happens that, while on the one hand much
agreement has been reached as to what Oracles
in the Book are in verse, and what, however
rhythmical, are in prose, some passages remain,
on the original literary form of which a variety
of opinion is possible. This is not all in dispute.
Even the admitted poems are variously scanned&mdash;that
is either read in different metres or, if in the
same metre, either with or without irregularities.
Such differences of literary judgment are due
partly to our still imperfect knowledge of the laws
of Hebrew metre and partly to the variety of
possible readings of the text. Nor is even that
all. The claim has been made not only to confine
Jeremiah's genuine Oracles to the metrical portions
of the Book, but, by drastic emendations of the
text, to reduce them to one single, exact, unvarying
metre.
</p>

<p>
These questions and claims&mdash;all-important as
they are for the definition of the range and character
of the prophet's activity&mdash;we can decide only
after a preliminary consideration of the few clear
<pb n='033'/><anchor id='Pg033'/>
and admitted principles of Hebrew poetry, of their
consequences, and of analogies to them in other
literatures.
</p>

<p>
In Hebrew poetry there are some principles about
which no doubt exists. <hi rend='italic'>First</hi>, its dominant feature
is Parallelism, Parallelism of meaning, which,
though found in all human song, is carried through
this poetry with a constancy unmatched in any
other save the Babylonian. The lines of a couplet
or a triplet of Hebrew verse may be Synonymous,
that is identical in meaning, or Supplementary
and Progressive, or Antithetic. But at least their
meanings respond or correspond to each other in
a way, for which no better name has been found
than that given it by Bishop Lowth more than a
century and a half ago, <q>Parallelismus Membrorum.</q><note place='foot'><q>De
Sacra Pœsi Hebræorum,</q> 1753.</note>
<hi rend='italic'>Second</hi>, this rhythm of meaning is
wedded to a rhythm of sound which is achieved by
the observance of a varying proportion between
stressed or heavily accented syllables and unstressed.
That is clear even though we are unable
to discriminate the proportion in every case or even
to tell whether there were fixed rules for it; the
vowel-system of our Hebrew text being possibly
different from what prevailed in ancient Hebrew.
But on the whole it is probable that as in other
primitive poetries<note place='foot'>Writing of the early
German lyric, Dr. John Lees says in his
volume on <q>The German Lyric</q> (London, Dent &amp; Sons, 1914):
<q>In regard to the length of the lines, their number, and the
arrangement of the rhymes, the poet has absolute freedom in all
three classes;</q> and again of the Volkslied <q>there is no mechanical
counting of syllables; the variation in the number of accented
and unaccented syllables is the secret of the verse.</q>
And he quotes from Herder on the Volkslieder: <q>songs of the
people ... songs which often do not scan and are badly
rhymed.</q></note> there were no exact or rigorous
<pb n='034'/><anchor id='Pg034'/>
rules as to the proportion of beats or stresses in
the single lines. For the rhythm of sense is the
main thing&mdash;the ruling factor&mdash;and though the
effort to express this in equal or regularly proportioned
lines is always perceptible, yet in the
more primitive forms of the poetry just as in some
English folk-songs and ballads the effort did not
constantly succeed. The art of the poet was not
always equal to the strength of his passion or the
length of his vision, or the urgency of his meaning.
The meaning was the main thing and had
to be beat out, even though to effect this was to
make the lines irregular. As I have said in my
Schweich Lectures: <q>If the Hebrew poet be so
constantly bent on a rhythm of sense this must
inevitably modify his rhythms of sound. If his
first aim be to produce lines each more or less
complete in meaning, but so as to run parallel to
its fellow, it follows that these lines cannot be
always exactly regular in length or measure of
time. If the governing principle of the poetry
requires each line to be a clause or sentence in
itself, the lines will frequently tend, of course
<pb n='035'/><anchor id='Pg035'/>
within limits, to have more or fewer stresses than
are normal throughout the poem.</q>
</p>

<p>
But there are other explanations of the metrical
irregularities in the traditional text of Hebrew
poems, which make it probable that these irregularities
are often original and not always (as they
sometimes are) the blunders of copyists. In all
forms of Eastern art we trace the influence of what
we may call Symmetriphobia, an aversion to
absolute symmetry which expresses itself in more
or less arbitrary disturbances of the style or
pattern of the work. The visitor to the East
knows how this influence operates in weaving and
architecture. But its opportunities are more frequent,
and may be used more gracefully, in the
art of poetry. For instance, in many an Old
Testament poem in which a single form of metre
prevails there is introduced at intervals, and especially
at the end of a strophe, a longer and
heavier line, similar to what the Germans call the
<q>Schwellvers</q> in their primitive ballads. And
this metrical irregularity is generally to the profit
both of the music and of the meaning.
</p>

<p>
Further, the fact that poems, such as we now
deal with, were not composed in writing, but
were sung or chanted is another proof of the
possibility that the irregularities in their metre
are original. In the songs of the peasants of
Palestine at the present day the lines vary as
much as from two to five accents, and within the
<pb n='036'/><anchor id='Pg036'/>
same metrical form from three to four; lines with
three accents as written will, when sung to music,
be stressed with four, or with four as written will
be stressed with five in order to suit the
melody.<note place='foot'>Dalman, <q>Palästinischer Diwan.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
Nor are such irregularities confined to Eastern
or primitive poetry. In the later blank verse of
Shakespeare, broken lines and redundant syllables
are numerous, but under his hand they become
things of beauty, and <q>the irregularity is the
foundation of the larger and nobler rule.</q> To
quote the historian of English prosody&mdash;<q>These
are quite deliberate indulgences in excess or defect,
over or under a regular norm, which is so pervading
and so thoroughly marked that it carries
them off on its wings.</q><note place='foot'>Saintsbury,
<q>History of English Prosody,</q> vol. ii. 53,
54.</note> Heine in his unrhymed
<q>Nordseebilder,</q> has many irregular lines&mdash;irregularities
suitable to the variety of the subjects
of his verse.
</p>

<p>
Again, in relevance to the mixture of poetry
with prose in the prophetic parts of the Book of
Jeremiah, it is just to note that the early pre-Islamic
rhapsodists of Arabia used prose narratives
to illustrate the subjects of their chants;
that many later works in Arabic literature are
medleys of prose and verse; that in particular the
prose of the <q>Arabian Nights</q> frequently breaks
into metre; while the singing women of Mecca
<pb n='037'/><anchor id='Pg037'/>
<q>often put metre aside and employ the easier form
of rhymed prose</q><note place='foot'>Snouck Hurgronje,
<q>Mekka,</q> vol. ii. 62.</note> the <q>Saj</q> as it is called.
</p>

<p>
If I may offer a somewhat rough illustration,
the works of some Eastern poets are like canoe
voyages in Canada, in which the canoe now
glides down a stream and is again carried overland
by what are called portages to other streams or
other branches of the same stream. Similarly
these works have their clear streams of poetry,
but every now and again their portages of prose.
I may say at once that we shall find this true also
of the Book of Jeremiah.
</p>

<p>
All these phenomena, both of Eastern and of
Western poetry, justify us in regarding with
scepticism recent attempts whether to eliminate&mdash;by
purely arbitrary omissions and additions, not
founded on the evidence of the Manuscripts and
Versions&mdash;the irregularities in the metrical portions
of the Book of Jeremiah, or to confine the
Prophet's genuine Oracles to these metrical
portions, and to deny that he ever passed from
metre into rhythmical prose. And our scepticism
becomes stronger when we observe to what different
results these attempts have led, especially in
the particular form or forms of metre employed.
</p>

<p>
Professor Duhm, for instance, confines our
prophet to one invariable form, that of the Qînah
or Hebrew Elegy, each stanza of which consists
<pb n='038'/><anchor id='Pg038'/>
of four lines of alternately <emph>three</emph> and <emph>two</emph> accents or
beats; and by drastic and often quite arbitrary
emendation of the text he removes from this every
irregularity whether of defect or redundance in the
separate lines.<note place='foot'><q>Kurzer Hand-Commentar,</q> 1901; and <q>Das Buch
Jeremia,</q> a translation, 1903.</note> On the other hand Cornill concludes
that <q>the metrical pieces in the book are
written throughout in <hi rend='italic'>Oktastichs</hi>,</q> or eight lines
a piece, but admits (and rightly) that <q>in the
metrical structure of the individual lines there
prevails a certain freedom, due to the fact that for
the prophet verse-making (<hi rend='italic'>Dichten</hi>) was not an end
in itself.</q> While he allows, as all must, that
Jeremiah frequently used the Qînah metre, he
emphasises the presence of the irregular line,
almost as though it were the real basis of the prophetic
metre.<note place='foot'><q>Das Buch Jeremia,</q> 1905, p.
xlvi.</note> Other modern scholars by starting
from other presuppositions or by employing
various degrees of the textual evidence of the
Versions, have reached results different from those
of Duhm and Cornill.<note place='foot'>E.g. Sievers,
<q>Metrische Studien,</q> in the <q>Transactions of
Saxon Society of the Sciences,</q> vol. xxi (which relies too much
on the Massoretic or Canonical text); Erbt, <q>Jeremia u. seine
Zeit,</q> p. 298; Giesebrecht, <q>Jeremia's Metrik,</q> iii. ff.; Karl
Budde's relevant pages in his <q>Geschichte der althebräischen
Litteratur,</q> 1906 reached me after I had expressed the views I
have given above. They agree in the main with these
views.</note> But at the same time it is
remarkable how much agreement prevails as to
<pb n='039'/><anchor id='Pg039'/>
the frequent presence of the Qînah measure or its
near equivalent.
</p>

<p>
To sum up: in view of the argument adduced
from the obvious principles of Hebrew verse and
of the primitive poetic practice of other nations&mdash;not
to speak of Shakespeare and some modern
poets&mdash;I am persuaded after close study of the
text that, though Jeremiah takes most readily
to the specific Qînah metre, it is a gross and
pedantic error to suppose that he confined himself
to this, or that when it appears in our Book it is
always to be read in the same exact form without
irregularities. The conclusion is reasonable
that this rural prophet, brought up in a country
village and addressing a people of peasants, used
the same license with his metres that we have
observed in other poetries of his own race. Nor
is it credible that whatever the purpose of his
message was&mdash;reminiscence, or dirge, or threat
of doom or call to repent, or a didactic purpose&mdash;Jeremiah,
throughout the very various conditions
of his long ministry of forty years, employed
but one metre and that only in its strictest form
allowing of no irregularities. This, I say, is not
credible.<note place='foot'>Certainly the evidence of both the Hebrew text and the
Versions are against it, and the sense supports the text. More
than once when sharp questions or challenges are thrown out,
we have very appropriately two parallel lines of <emph>two</emph> accents
each instead of the usual Qînah couplet of <emph>three</emph>
and <emph>two</emph>: e.g. ii. 14 and iii. 5. See below, pp.
<ref target="Pg046">46</ref> ff. Compare the variety of
metres, which Schiller employs to such good effect in his <q>Song
of the Bell</q>&mdash;a variety in beautiful harmony with that of the
different aspects of life on which he touches; and see above,
p. <ref target="Pg036">36</ref>, on the irregularity of metre in
Heine's <hi rend='italic'>Nordseebilder</hi>.</note>
</p>

<pb n='040'/><anchor id='Pg040'/>

<p>
The other question, whether in addition Jeremiah
ever used prose in addressing his people,
may be still more confidently answered. Duhm
maintains that with the exception of the letter to
the Jewish exiles in Babylonia,<note place='foot'>Ch.
xxix.</note> the Prophet never
spoke or wrote to his people in prose, and that
the Book contains no Oracles from him, beyond
some sixty short poems in a uniform measure.
These Duhm alleges&mdash;and this is all that he finds
in them&mdash;reveal Jeremiah as a man of modest,
tender, shrinking temper, <q>no ruler of spirits, a delicate
observer, a sincere exhorter and counsellor, a
hero only in suffering and not in
attack.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Op.
cit.</hi>, p. xii.</note> Every
passage of the Book, which presents him in any
character beyond this&mdash;as an advocate for the Law
or as a didactic prophet&mdash;is the dream of a later
age, definitely separable from his own Oracles not
more by its inconsistence with the temper displayed
in these than by its prose form; for in prose,
according to Duhm, Jeremiah never prophesied.
On the evidence we have reviewed this also is not
credible. That Jeremiah never passed from verse
to prose when addressing his people is a theory
at variance with the practice of other poets of his
<pb n='041'/><anchor id='Pg041'/>
race; and the more unlikely in his case, who was
not only a poet but a prophet, charged with truths
heavier than could always be carried to the heart
of his nation upon a single form of folk-song. Not
one of the older prophets, upon whom at first he
leant, but used both prose and verse; and besides
there had burst upon his young ear a new style of
prophetic prose, rhythmical and catching beyond
any hitherto publicly heard in Israel. At least
some portions of our Book of Deuteronomy were
discovered in the Temple a few years after his call,
and by order of King Josiah were being recited
throughout Judah. Is it probable that he, whose
teaching proves him to have been in sympathy
with the temper and the practical purpose of that
Book, should never have yielded to the use of its
distinctive and haunting style?
</p>

<p>
It is true that, while the lyrics which are
undoubtedly the prophet's own are terse, concrete,
poignant and graceful, the style of many&mdash;not
of all&mdash;of the prose discourses attributed
to him is copious, diffuse, and sometimes
cold. But then it is verse which is most
accurately gripped by the memory and firmly
preserved in tradition; it is verse, too, which
best guards the original fire. Prose discourses,
whether in their first reporting or in their subsequent
tradition more readily tend to dilate and
to relax their style. Nor is any style of prose
so open as the Deuteronomic to additions,
<pb n='042'/><anchor id='Pg042'/>
parentheses, qualifications, needless recurrence
of formulas and favourite phrases, and the like.
</p>

<p>
Therefore in the selection of materials available
for estimating the range and character of
Jeremiah's activities as a prophet, we must not
reject any prose Oracles offered by the Book as
his, simply because they are in prose. This
reasonable caution will be of use when we come
to consider the question of the authenticity of
such important passages as those which recount
his call, or represent him as assisting in the
promulgation of Deuteronomy, and uttering the
Oracle on the New Covenant.<note place='foot'>Chs. i, xi and xxxi.</note>
</p>

<p>
But, while it has been necessary to reject as
groundless the theory that Jeremiah was exclusively
a poet of a limited temper and a single
form of verse and was not the author of any
of the prose attributed to him, we must keep in
mind that he did pour himself forth in verse;
that it was natural for a rural priest such as
he, aiming at the heart of what was mainly a
nation of peasants, to use the form or forms
of folk-song most familiar to them<note place='foot'><q>It
is an understatement of the case to say that the folk-song
has been a source of inspiration. In the very greatest
lyricists we simply find the folk-song in a new shape: it has
become more polished and artistic, and it has been made the
instrument of personal lyrical utterance.</q>&mdash;John Lees, M.A.,
D.Litt., <q>The German Lyric</q> (London, etc., Dent &amp; Sons,
1914).</note>&mdash;in fact
<pb n='043'/><anchor id='Pg043'/>
the only literary forms with which they were
familiar; and that in all probability more of
the man himself comes out in the poetry than in
the prose which he has left to us. By his native
gifts and his earliest associations he was a poet
to begin with; and therefore the form and
character of his poetry, especially as revealing
himself, demand our attention.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='stars: 5'/>

<p>
From what has been said it is clear that we
must not seek too high for Jeremiah's rank as a
poet. The temptation to this&mdash;which has overcome
some recent writers&mdash;is due partly to a
recoil from older, unjust depreciations of his
prophetic style and partly to the sublimity of the
truths which that mixed style frequently conveys.
But those truths apart, his verse was just that of
the folksongs of the peasants among whom he
was reared&mdash;sometimes of an exquisite exactness
of tone and delicacy of feeling, but sometimes
full both of what are metrical irregularities according
to modern standards, and of coarse images
and similes. To reduce the metrical irregularities,
by such arbitrary methods as Duhm's, may
occasionally enhance the music and sharpen the
edge of an Oracle yet oftener dulls the melody
and weakens the emphasis.<note place='foot'>And in
particular sins against the fundamental principle of
parallelism, e.g. in iv. 3, where even with the help of part of an
obvious title to the Oracle he gets only three lines and supposes
the fourth to be lost; and though the sense-parallelism is
generally within a couplet he divides it between the last line
of his first couplet and the first of his second. Again, if we
keep in mind what is said above (p. <ref target="Pg035">35</ref>)
of the recurrence in Hebrew poems of longer, heavier lines
at intervals&mdash;especially at the end of a
strophe or a poem, we must feel a number of
Duhm's emendations to be not only unnecessary but harmful to
the effectiveness of the verse.</note> The figures again
<pb n='044'/><anchor id='Pg044'/>
are always simple and homely, but sometimes
even ugly, as is not infrequent in the rural poetries
of all peoples. Even the dung on the pastures
and the tempers of breeding animals are as readily
used as are the cleaner details of domestic life and
of farming&mdash;the house-candle, the house-mill, the
wine skins, the ornaments of women, the yoke,
the plough, and so forth. And there are abrupt
changes of metaphor as in our early ballads, due
to the rush of a quick imagination and the crowd
of concrete figures it catches.
</p>

<p>
Some of Jeremiah's verse indeed shows no
irregularity. The following, for instance, which
recalls as Hosea loved to do the innocence and
loyalty of Israel's desert days, is in the normal
Qînah rhythm of lines with alternately <emph>three</emph> and
<emph>two</emph> accents each. The two first lines are rhymed,
the rest not.
</p>

<p>
II. 2f.:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>The troth of thy youth I remember,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Thy love as a bride,</l>
<l>Thy follow of Me through the desert,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The land unsown.</l>
<pb n='045'/><anchor id='Pg045'/>
<l>Holy to the Lord was Israel,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Of His income the firstling,</l>
<l>All that would eat it stood guilty,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Evil came on them.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Or II. 32:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Can a maiden forget her adorning,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Or her girdle the bride?</l>
<l>Yet Me have My people forgotten,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Days without number.</l>
<l>How fine hast thou fashioned thy ways,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>To seek after love!</l>
<l>Thus 't was thyself<note place='foot'>Pointing את with Patah-Sheva
for Tsere.</note> to [those] evils</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Didst train<note place='foot'>Pointing לםדתי
with Chireq-Patah-Sheva-Sheva.</note> thy ways.</l>
<l>Yea on thy skirts is found blood</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Of innocent<note place='foot'>Hebrew adds
<hi rend='italic'>poor</hi>.</note> souls.</l>
<l>Not only on felons(?) I find it,<note place='foot'>So Duhm after
the Greek; see p. 97, n. 3.</note></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>But over all these.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Here again is a passage which, with slight
emendations and these not arbitrary, yields a fair
constancy of metre (IV. 29-31):&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>From the noise of the horse and the bowmen</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>All the land is in flight,</l>
<l>They are into the caves, huddle in thickets,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And are up on the
crags.<note place='foot'>After the Greek.</note></l>
<l>Every town of its folk is forsaken,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>With none to inhabit.</l>
<pb n='046'/><anchor id='Pg046'/>
<l>All is up! Thou destined to ruin,(?)<note place='foot'>By
differently arranging the Hebrew consonants, see p. <ref target="Pg117">117</ref>.
Other arrangements are possible. Greek omits <hi rend='italic'>destined to
ruin</hi>.</note></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>What doest thou now</l>
<l>That thou deck'st thee in deckings of gold</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And clothest in scarlet,<note place='foot'>Hebrew
and Greek have this couplet in the reverse
order.</note></l>
<l>And with stibium widenest thine eyes?</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>In vain dost thou prink!</l>
<l>Though satyrs, they utterly loathe thee,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Thy life are they after.</l>
<l>For voice as of travail I hear,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Anguish as hers that beareth,</l>
<l>The voice of the Daughter of Ṣion agasp,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>She spreadeth her hands:</l>
<l><q rend='pre'>Woe unto me, but it faints,</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='post'>My life to the butchers!</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
On the other hand here is a metre,<note place='foot'>ii. 14-17.</note> for the
irregularities of which no remedy is offered by
alternative readings in the Versions, but Duhm
and others reduce these only by padding the text
with particles and other terms. Yet these very
irregularities have reason; they suit the meaning
to be expressed. Thus while some of the couplets
are in the Qînah metre, it is instructive that the
first three lines are <emph>all</emph> short, because they are
mere ejaculations&mdash;that is they belong to the
<pb n='047'/><anchor id='Pg047'/>
same class of happy irregularities as we recalled
in Shakespeare's blank verse.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Israel a slave!</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Or house-born serf!</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Why he for a prey?</l>
<l>Against him the young lions roar,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Give forth their voice,</l>
<l>And his land they lay waste</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Burning and tenantless.</l>
<l>Is not this being done thee</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>For thy leaving of Me?</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Or take the broken line added to the regular
verse on Rachel's mourning, the sob upon which
the wail dies out:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>A voice in Ramah is heard, lamentation</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And bitterest weeping,</l>
<l>Rachel beweeping her children</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And will not be comforted&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>For they are not!<note place='foot'>xxxi. 15.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Sometimes, too, a stanza of regular metre is
preceded or followed by a passionate line of
appeal, either from Jeremiah himself or from
another&mdash;I love to think from himself, added when
his Oracles were about to be repeated to the
people in 604-3. Thus in Ch. II. 31 we find the
cry,
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>O generation look at the Word of the Lord!</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<pb n='048'/><anchor id='Pg048'/>

<p>
breaking in before the following regular verse,
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Have I been a desert to Israel,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Or land of thick darkness?</l>
<l>Why say my folk, <q rend='pre'>We are off,</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='post'>No more to meet Thee.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
There is another poem in which the Qînah
measure prevails but with occasional lines longer
than is normal&mdash;Ch. V. 1-6<hi rend='italic'>a</hi> (alternatively to end
of 5<note place='foot'>While Duhm and Giesebrecht reduce the text to the exact
Qînah form, Erbt correctly reads it as varied by lines of four
accents.</note>).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Run through Jerusalem's streets,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Look now and know,</l>
<l>And search her broad places</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>If a man ye can find,</l>
<l>If there be that doth justice</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Aiming at honesty.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>[That I may forgive her.]</l>
<l>Though they say, <q>As God liveth,</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Falsely they swear.</l>
<l>Lord, are thine eyes upon lies<note place='foot'>After Duhm who reads
לכן = לאכן (cp. viii. 6) and transfers
it to the following line.</note></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And not on the truth?</l>
<l>Thou hast smitten, they ail not,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Consumed them, they take not correction;</l>
<l>Their faces set harder than rock,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>They refuse to return.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<pb n='049'/><anchor id='Pg049'/>

<p>
Or take Ch. II. 5-8. A stanza of four lines in
irregular Qînah measure (verse 5) is followed by
a couplet of four-two stresses and several lines of
three each (verses 6 and 7), and then (verse 8) by
a couplet of three-two, another of four-three, and
another of three-three.<note place='foot'>See below, p.
<ref target="Pg092">92</ref>.</note> In Chs. IX and X also
we shall find irregular metres.
</p>

<p>
Let us now take a passage, IX. 22, 23, which,
except for its last couplet, is of another measure
than the Qînah. The lines have three accents
each, like those of the Book of Job:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Boast not the wise in his wisdom,</l>
<l>Boast not the strong in his strength,</l>
<l>Boast not the rich in his riches,</l>
<l>But in this let him boast who would boast&mdash;</l>
<l>Instinct and knowledge of Me,</l>
<l>Me, the Lord, Who work troth</l>
<l>And<note place='foot'>So Greek.</note> justice and right upon earth,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>For in these I delight.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Or this couplet, X. 23, in lines of four stresses
each:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Lord, I know&mdash;not to man is his way,</l>
<l>Not a man's to walk or settle his steps!</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Not being in the Qînah measure, both these
passages are denied to Jeremiah by Duhm. Is
not this arbitrary?
</p>

<p>
The sections of the Book which pass from verse
to prose and from prose to verse are frequent.
</p>

<pb n='050'/><anchor id='Pg050'/>

<p>
One of the most striking is the narrative of the
Prophet's call, Ch. I. 4-19, which I leave to be
rendered in the next lecture. In Chap. VII. 28 ff.
we have, to begin with, two verses:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>This is the folk that obeyed not</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The voice of the Lord,<note place='foot'>So
Greek; Hebrew adds <hi rend='italic'>their God</hi>.</note></l>
<l>That would not accept correction;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Lost<note place='foot'>Hebrew adds
<hi rend='italic'>and is cut off</hi>.</note> is truth from their mouth.</l>
<l>Shear and scatter thy locks,</l>
<l>Raise a dirge on the heights,</l>
<l>The Lord hath refused and forsaken</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The sons of His wrath.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Then these verses are followed by a prose tale of
the people's sins. Is this necessarily from a later
hand, as Duhm maintains, and not naturally from
Jeremiah himself?
</p>

<p>
Again Chs. VIII and IX are a medley of lyrics
and prose passages. While some of the prose is
certainly not Jeremiah's, being irrelevant to the
lyrics and showing the colour of a later age, the
rest may well be from himself.
</p>

<p>
Ch. XIV is also a medley of verse and prose.
After the Dirge on the Drought (which we take
later), comes a passage in rhythmical prose (verses
11-16), broken only by the metrical utterance of
the false prophets in verse 13:&mdash;
</p>

<pb n='051'/><anchor id='Pg051'/>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Sword or famine ye shall not see,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>They shall not be yours;</l>
<l>But peace and staith shall I give you</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Within this Place.<note place='foot'>The Hebrew
<hi rend='italic'>makôm</hi> must here as elsewhere be given as
equivalent to the Arabic <hi rend='italic'>makâm</hi> (literally like the Hebrew
<hi rend='italic'>standing-place</hi> but) generally
<hi rend='italic'>sacred site</hi>.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
And verse comes in again in verses 17-18, an
Oracle of Jeremiah's own:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Let mine eyes with tears run down,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>By night and by day,</l>
<l>Let them not cease from weeping<note place='foot'>After Duhm.</note></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>For great is the breach&mdash;</l>
<l>Broken the Virgin, Daughter of my people,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Most sore the wound!</l>
<l>Fare I forth to the field,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Lo, the slain of the sword;</l>
<l>If I enter the city,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Lo, anguish of famine.</l>
<l>Priest and prophet alike are gone begging</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>In a land they know not.</l>
<l>Hast Thou utterly cast away Judah,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Loathes Ṣion Thy soul?</l>
<l>Why then hast Thou smitten us,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Past our healing?</l>
<l>Hoped we for peace&mdash;no good,</l>
<l>For time to heal&mdash;and lo panic!</l>
<l>Lord we acknowledge our evil,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The guilt of our fathers&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>To Thee have we sinned.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<pb n='052'/><anchor id='Pg052'/>

<p>
And now the measure changes to one of longer
irregular lines, hardly distinguishable from rhythmical
prose, which Duhm therefore takes, precariously,
as from a later hand:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>For Thy Name's sake do not despise,</l>
<l>Demean not the Throne of Thy Glory,</l>
<l>Remember and break not Thy Covenant with us!</l>
<l>Can any of the gentile Bubbles bring rain,</l>
<l>Or the Heavens give the showers?</l>
<l>Art not Thou He<note place='foot'>Hebrew adds
<hi rend='italic'>the Lord our God</hi>; not in the Greek.</note> on whom we must
wait?</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>For all these Thou hast made.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Again in Ch. XV. 1-2, prose is followed by a
couplet, this by more prose (verses 3, 4) and this
by verse again (verses 5-9). But these parts are
relevant to each other, and some of Duhm's
objections to the prose seem inadequate and even
trifling. For while the heavy judgment is suitably
detailed by the prose, the following dirge is as
naturally in verse:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Jerusalem, who shall pity,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Who shall bemoan thee?</l>
<l>Who shall but turn him to ask</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>After thy welfare?</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
And once more, in the Oracle Ch. III. 1-6 the first
verse, a quotation from the law on a divorced wife,
is in prose, and no one doubts that Jeremiah himself
is the quoter, while the rest, recounting
<pb n='053'/><anchor id='Pg053'/>
Israel's unfaithfulness to her Husband is in
verse. See below, pages <ref target="Pg098">98</ref>,
<ref target="Pg099">99</ref>.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='stars: 5'/>

<p>
So much for the varied and often irregular
streams of the Prophet's verse and their interruptions
and connections by <q>portages</q> of prose.
Let us turn now from the measures to the substance
and tempers of the poetry.
</p>

<p>
As in all folk-song the language is simple, but
its general inevitableness&mdash;just the fit and ringing
word&mdash;stamps the verse as a true poet's. Hence
the difficulty of translating. So much depends
on the music of the Hebrew word chosen, so much
on the angle at which it is aimed at the ear, the
exact note which it sings through the air. It is
seldom possible to echo these in another language;
and therefore all versions, metrical or in prose, must
seem tame and dull beside the ring of the original.
Before taking some of the Prophet's renderings of
the more concrete aspects of life I give, as even
more difficult to render, one of his moral reflections
in verse&mdash;Ch. XVII. 5 f. Mark the scarceness of
abstract terms, the concreteness of the figures:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Curséd the wight that trusteth in man</l>
<l>Making flesh his stay!</l>
<l>[And his heart from the Lord is turned]</l>
<l>Like some desert-scrub shall he be,</l>
<l>Nor see any coming of good,</l>
<l>But dwell in the aridest desert,</l>
<l>A salt, uninhabited land.</l>
<pb n='054'/><anchor id='Pg054'/>
<l>Blesséd the wight that trusts in the Lord,</l>
<l>And the Lord is his trust!</l>
<l>He like a tree shall be planted by waters,</l>
<l>That stretches its roots to the stream,</l>
<l>Unafraid<note place='foot'>So Greek and Vulg.;
Hebrew has <hi rend='italic'>he shall not see</hi>.</note> at the coming of heat,</l>
<l>His leaf shall be green.</l>
<l>Sans care in a year of drought,</l>
<l>He fails not in yielding his fruit.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
As here, so generally, the simplicity of the poet's
diction is matched by that of his metaphors, similes,
and parables. A girl and her ornaments, a man
and his waist-cloth&mdash;thus he figures what ought to
be the clinging relations between Israel and their
God. The stunted desert-shrub in contrast to
the river-side oaks, the incomparable olive, the
dropped sheaf and even the dung upon the fields;
the vulture, stork, crane and swift; the lion, wolf
and spotted leopard coming up from the desert or
the jungles of Jordan; the hinnying stallions and
the heifer in her heat; the black Ethiopian, already
familiar in the streets of Jerusalem, the potter and
his wheel, the shepherd, plowman and vinedresser,
the driver with his ox's yoke upon his shoulders;
the harlot by the wayside; the light in the home
and sound of the hand-mill&mdash;all everyday objects
of his people's sight and hearing as they herded,
ploughed, sowed, reaped or went to market in the
city&mdash;he brings them in simply and with natural
<pb n='055'/><anchor id='Pg055'/>
ease as figures of the truths he is enforcing. They
are never bald or uncouth, though in translation
they may sometimes sound so.
</p>

<p>
In the very bareness of his use of them there
lurks an occasional irony as in the following&mdash;a
passage of prose broken by a single line of verse.<note place='foot'>xiii.
12-14. The above rendering follows the Greek version.</note>
The Deity is addressing the prophet:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>And thou shalt say unto this people,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>Every jar shall be filled with wine,</q></l>
</lg>
<p>
and it shall be if they say unto thee, <q rend='pre'>Don't
we know of course<note place='foot'>A Hebrew idiom, literally
<hi rend='italic'>don't, knowing, we know</hi>?</note> that</q>
</p>
<lg>
<l><q>Every jar shall be filled with wine,</q></l>
</lg>
<p>
then thou shalt say unto them: Thus saith
the Lord, Lo, I am about to fill the inhabitants
of this land, the kings and princes, the priests
and prophets, even Judah and all the inhabitants
of Jerusalem, with drunkenness
[the drunkenness, that is, of horror at impending
judgments] and I will dash them
one against another, fathers and sons together.
I will not pity, saith the Lord, nor
spare nor have compassion that I should not
destroy them.
</p>
</quote>

<p>
How one catches the irritation of the crowd on
being told what seems to them such a commonplace&mdash;till
it is interpreted!
</p>

<pb n='056'/><anchor id='Pg056'/>

<p>
Like his fellow-prophets, whose moral atmosphere
was as burning as their physical summer,
who living on the edge of the desert under a
downright sun <hi rend='italic'>drew breath</hi>
(as Isaiah puts it) <hi rend='italic'>in the
fear of the Lord</hi> and saw the world in the blaze of
His justice, Jeremiah brings home to the hearts
of his people the truths and judgments, with
which he was charged, in the hard, hot realism
of their austere world. Through his verse we
see the barer landscapes of Benjamin and Judah
without shadow or other relief, every ugly detail
exposed by the ruthless noon, and beyond them
the desert hills shimmering through the heat.
Drought, famine, pestilence and especially war
sweep over the land and the ghastly prostrate
things, human as well as animal, which their
skirts leave behind are rendered with vividness,
poignancy and horror of detail.
</p>

<p>
Take, to begin with, the following, XIV. 1 ff.:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>The Word of the Lord to Jeremiah Concerning
the Drought.</hi></l>
</lg>
<lg>
<l>Jerusalem's cry is gone up,</l>
<l>Judah is mourning,</l>
<l>The gates thereof faint in</l>
<l>Black grief to the ground.</l>
</lg>
<lg>
<l>Her nobles sent their menials for water,</l>
<l>They came to the pits;</l>
<l>Water found none and returned,</l>
<pb n='057'/><anchor id='Pg057'/>
<l>Empty their vessels.</l>
<l>[Abashed and confounded</l>
<l>They cover their heads.]<note place='foot'>This couplet is wanting in
the Greek.</note></l>
</lg>
<lg>
<l>The tillers<note place='foot'>So rightly Duhm after the Greek.</note>
of the ground are dismayed,</l>
<l>For no rain hath been<note place='foot'>Hebrew uselessly
adds <hi rend='italic'>in the land</hi>.</note>;</l>
<l>And abashed are the ploughmen,</l>
<l>They cover their heads.</l>
</lg>
<lg>
<l>The hind on the moor calves and abandons,</l>
<l>For the grass has not come.</l>
<l>On the bare heights stand the wild asses,</l>
<l>Gasping for air</l>
<l>With glazen eyes&mdash;</l>
<l>Herb there is none!</l>
</lg>
<lg>
<l>Though our sins do witness against us,</l>
<l>Lord act for the sake of Thy Name!</l>
<l>[For many have been our backslidings,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>'Fore Thee have we sinned.]</l>
</lg>
<lg>
<l>Hope of Israel, His Saviour</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>In time of trouble,</l>
<l>Why be like a traveller<note place='foot'>So Duhm, reading
<hi rend='italic'>gār</hi> for <hi rend='italic'>gēr</hi>.</note> through the land,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Or wayfaring guest of a night?</l>
<l>Why art Thou as one that is stunned,&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Strong yet unable to save?</l>
</lg>
<pb n='058'/><anchor id='Pg058'/>
<lg>
<l>Yet Lord, Thou art in our midst,</l>
<l>[O'er us Thy Name hath been called]</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Do not forsake us!</l>
</lg>
<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Thus saith the Lord of this people:&mdash;</l>
</lg>
<lg>
<l>So fond to wander are they,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their feet they restrain not,</l>
<l>The Lord hath no pleasure in them,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>He remembers their guilt.<note place='foot'>Hebrew
adds, <hi rend='italic'>and will make visitation on their sins</hi>, which
the Greek omits.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
The following dirge is on either a war or a
pestilence, or on both, for they often came together.
The text of the first lines is uncertain,
the Hebrew and Greek differing considerably:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Call ye the keening women to come,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And send for the wise ones,</l>
<l>That they hasten and sing us a dirge,</l>
<l>Till with tears our eyes run down,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Our eyelids with water.</l>
</lg>
<lg>
<l>For death has come up by our windows,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And into our palaces,</l>
<l>Cutting off from the streets the children,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The youths from the places.</l>
<l>And fallen are the corpses of men</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Like dung on the field,</l>
<l>Or sheaves left after the reaper,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And nobody gathers.<note place='foot'>ix.
17 f., 21 f.; see also pp. <ref target="Pg205">205</ref>,
<ref target="Pg206">206</ref>.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<pb n='059'/><anchor id='Pg059'/>

<p>
The minatory discourses are sombre and lurid.
Sometimes the terror foretold is nameless and
mystic, yet even then the Prophet's simplicity
does not fail but rather contributes to the vague,
undefined horror. In the following it is premature
night which creeps over the hills&mdash;night without
shelter for the weary or refuge for the hunted.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Hear and give ear, be not proud,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>For the Lord hath spoken!</l>
<l>Give glory to the Lord your God</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Before it grows dark,</l>
<l>And before your feet stumble&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On the mountains of dusk.</l>
<l>While ye look for light, He turns it to gloom</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And sets it thick darkness.<note place='foot'>xiii.
15-16.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
There this poem leaves the Doom, but in others
Jeremiah leaps in a moment from the vague and
far-looming to the near and exact. He follows a
line which songs of vengeance or deliverance often
take among unsophisticated peoples in touch with
nature. They will paint you a coming judgment
first in the figure of a lowering cloud or bursting
storm and then in the twinkling of an eye they
turn the clouds or the lightnings into the ranks
and flashing arms of invaders arrived. I remember
an instance of this within one verse of a negro
song from the time of the American Civil War:&mdash;
</p>

<pb n='060'/><anchor id='Pg060'/>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Don't you see de lightning flashing in de cane-brakes?</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Don't you think we'se gwine to have a storm?</l>
<l>No you is mistaken&mdash;dem's de darkies' bayonets,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And de buttons on de uniform!</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Examples of this sudden turn from the vague to
the real are found throughout Jeremiah's Oracles
of Doom. Here are some of them:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Wind off the glow of the bare desert heights,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Right on the Daughter of My people,</l>
<l>It is neither to winnow nor to cleanse,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>In full blast it meets me...:</l>
<l>Lo, like the clouds he is mounting,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Like the whirlwind his chariots!</l>
<l>Swifter than vultures his horses;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Woe! We are undone!</l>
</lg>
<lg>
<l>For hark a signal from Dan,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Mount Ephraim echoes disaster,</l>
<l>Warn the folk! <q>They are come!</q><note place='foot'>So the Greek.</note></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Make heard o'er Jerusalem.</l>
<l>Lo, the beleaguerers (?) come</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>From a land far-off,</l>
<l>They let forth their voice on the townships of Judah,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>[Close] as the guards on her suburbs</l>
<pb n='061'/><anchor id='Pg061'/>
<l>They are on and around her,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>For Me she defied.<note place='foot'>iv. 11-13,
15-17. The text and so the metre of 16, 17 are
uncertain. For <hi rend='italic'>besiegers</hi> Duhm proposes by the change of one
letter to read <hi rend='italic'>panthers</hi>, to which in v. 6 Jeremiah likens the same
foes. Skinner, <hi rend='italic'>leopards</hi>. See below, p.
<ref target="Pg114">114</ref>.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
There is a similar leap from the vagueness of
IV. 23-26, which here follows, to the vivid detail
of verses 29-31 already rendered on page <ref target="Pg045">45</ref>.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>I looked to the earth, and lo, chaos,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>To the heavens, their light was gone,</l>
<l>I looked to the mountains, they quivered,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The hills were all shuddering.</l>
<l>I looked and behold not a man,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>All the birds of the heavens had fled.</l>
<l>I looked for the gardens, lo desert,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>All the townships were burning.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Or take a similar effect from the Oracle on the
Philistines, Ch. XLVII. 2, 3.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Lo, the waters are up in the North,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The torrents are plunging,</l>
<l>O'erwhelming the land and her fulness,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The city and her dwellers.</l>
<l>Mankind is crying and howling,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Every man in the land,</l>
<l>At the noise of the stamp of the hoofs of his steeds</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>At the rush of his cars,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The rumble of his wheels.</l>
<pb n='062'/><anchor id='Pg062'/>
<l>Fathers look not back for their children,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>So helpless their hands!<note place='foot'>Lit.
<hi rend='italic'>Because of the feebleness of their hands</hi>.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Or take the Prophet's second vision on his call,
Ch. I. 13 ff., the boiling cauldron with its face from
the North, which is to boil out over the land;
then the concrete explanation, <hi rend='italic'>I am calling to all
the kingdoms of the North, and they shall come and every
one set his throne in the gates of Jerusalem</hi>. There
you have it&mdash;that vague trouble brewing in the
far North and then in a moment the northern
invaders settled in the gates of the City.
</p>

<p>
But the poetry of Jeremiah had other strains.
I conclude this lecture with selections which deal
with the same impending judgment, yet are wistful
and tender, the poet taking as his own the sin
and sufferings of the people with whose doom he
was charged.
</p>

<p>
The first of these passages is as devoid of hope
as any we have already seen, but like Christ's
mourning over the City breathes the regret of a
great love&mdash;a profound and tender Alas!
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Jerusalem, who shall pity,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Who shall bemoan thee?</l>
<l>Or who will but turn him to ask</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>After thy welfare?</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Then follow lines of doom without reprieve
and the close comes:&mdash;
</p>

<pb n='063'/><anchor id='Pg063'/>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>She that bore seven hath fainted,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>She breathes out her life.</l>
<l>Set is her sun in the daytime,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Baffled and shaméd;</l>
<l>And their remnant I give to the sword</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>In face of their foes.<note place='foot'>xv. 5-9.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
In the following also the poet's heart is with
his people even while he despairs of them. The
lines, VIII. 14-IX. 1, of which 17 and 19<hi rend='italic'>b</hi> are
possibly later insertions, are addressed to the
country-folk of Judah and Benjamin:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>For what sit we still?</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Sweep together,</l>
<l>And into the fortified cities,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>That there we may perish!</l>
<l>For our God<note place='foot'>Greek; in both cases
Hebrew adds <hi rend='italic'>the Lord</hi>.</note> hath doomed us to perish,</l>
<l>And given us poison to drink,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>For to Him<note place='foot'>See previous note.</note>
have we sinned.</l>
<l>Hope for peace there was once&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>But no good&mdash;</l>
<l>For a season of healing&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Lo, panic.<note place='foot'>This verse is uncertain;
for Hebrew בעתה read with the Greek בהלה. For another arrangement see above,
p. <ref target="Pg051">51</ref>.</note></l>
<l>From Dan the sound has been heard,<note place='foot'>So Greek;
Hebrew omits <hi rend='italic'>sound</hi>.</note></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The hinnying of his horses;</l>
<pb n='064'/><anchor id='Pg064'/>
<l>With the noise of the neighing of his stallions</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>All the land is aquake.</l>
<l>For that this grief hath no comfort,<note place='foot'>This line is
uncertain.</note></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Sickens my heart upon me.</l>
<l>Hark to the cry of my people</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Wide o'er the land&mdash;</l>
<l><q rend='pre'>Is the Lord not in Ṣion,</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='post'>Is there no King
there?</q><note place='foot'>Greek.</note></l>
</lg>
<lg>
<l>Harvest is over, summer is ended</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And we are not saved!</l>
<l>For the breach of the Daughter of my people</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>I break, I darken,</l>
<l>Horror hath seized upon me,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Pangs as of her that beareth.<note place='foot'>So
Greek; Hebrew omits this line.</note></l>
<l>Is there no balm in Gilead,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Is there no healer?</l>
<l>Why will the wounds never stanch</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Of the daughter of my people?</l>
<l>O that my head were waters,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Mine eyes a fountain of tears,</l>
<l>That day and night I might weep</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>For the slain of my people!</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Such in the simple melodies of his music and
in the variety of his moods&mdash;now sombre, stern
and relentless, now tender and pleading, now in
despair of his people yet identifying himself with
<pb n='065'/><anchor id='Pg065'/>
them&mdash;was this rural poet, who was called to
carry the burdens of prophecy through forty of
the most critical and disastrous years of Israel's
history. In next lecture we shall follow the
earlier stages which his great heart pursued
beneath those burdens.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='066'/><anchor id='Pg066'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc' level1='Lecture III. The Prophet&mdash;His Youth And His Call.'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Lecture III.'/>
<head type='sub'>Lecture III.</head>
<head>The Prophet&mdash;His Youth And His Call.</head>

<p>
Jeremiah was born soon after 650 <hi rend='smallcaps'>B.C.</hi> of a
priestly house at Anathoth, a village in the
country of Benjamin near Jerusalem. Just before
his birth Egypt and the small states of Palestine
broke from allegiance to Assyria. War was
imminent, and it may have been because of some
hope in Israel of Divine intervention that several
children born about the time received the name
Yirmyahu&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Yahweh hurls</hi> or
<hi rend='italic'>shoots</hi>.<note place='foot'>(1)
Jeremiah of Libnah, father of Hamutal, II. Kings xxiii.
31; xxiv. 18; (2) Jeremiah, father of Jaazaniah, the Rechabite,
Jer. xxxv. 3; (3) Jeremiah the prophet, son of Hilḳiah.</note> The boy's
name and his father's, Hilḳiah, <hi rend='italic'>Yahweh my
portion</hi>,<note place='foot'>Not to be confounded with the
temple-priest, Hilḳiah, who was concerned with the finding of the Law.</note>
are tokens of the family's loyalty to the God of
Israel, at a time when the outburst in Jewry of
a very different class of personal names betrays
on the part of many a lapse from the true faith,
and when the loyal remnant of the people were
being persecuted by King Manasseh. Probably
the family were descended from Eli. For
<pb n='067'/><anchor id='Pg067'/>
Abiathar, the last of that descent to hold office as
Priest of the Ark, had an ancestral estate at
Anathoth, to which he retired upon his dismissal
by Solomon.<note place='foot'>I. Kings ii. 26
f.</note> The child of such a home would
be brought up under godly influence and in high
family traditions, with which much of the national
history was interwoven. It may have been from
his father that Jeremiah gained that knowledge of
Israel's past, of her ideal days in the desert, of
her subsequent declensions, and of the rallying
prophecies of the eighth century, which is manifest
in his earlier Oracles. Some have claimed a
literary habit for the stock of Abiathar.<note place='foot'>Duhm, p. 3.</note> Yet the
first words of God to Jeremiah&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>before I formed thee
in the body I knew thee, and before thou camest forth
from the womb I hallowed thee</hi><note place='foot'>Jer. i.
5.</note>&mdash;as well as the
singular originality he developed, rather turn us
away from his family traditions and influence.
</p>

<p>
What is more significant, for its effects appear
over all his earlier prophecies, is the country-side
on which the boy was born and reared.
</p>

<p>
Anathoth, which still keeps its ancient name
Anata, is a little village not four miles north-north-east
of Jerusalem, upon the first of the
rocky shelves by which the central range of
Palestine declines through desert to the valley of
the Jordan. The village is hidden from the main
road between Jerusalem and the North, and lies
<pb n='068'/><anchor id='Pg068'/>
on no cross-road to the East. One of its influences
on the spirit of its greatest son was its exposure
to the East and the Desert. The fields of
Anathoth face the sunrise and quickly merge into
the falling wilderness of Benjamin. It is the
same open, arid landscape as that on which
several prophets were bred: Amos a few miles
farther south at Tekoa, John Baptist, and during
His Temptation our Lord Himself. The tops of
the broken desert hills to the east are lower than
the village. The floor of the Jordan valley is not
visible, but across its felt gulf the mountains of
Gilead form a lofty horizon.
</p>

<p>
The descending foreground with no shelter
against the hot desert winds, the village herds
straying into the wilderness, the waste and
crumbling hills shimmering in the heat, the open
heavens and far line of the Gilead highlands, the
hungry wolves from the waste and lions from the
jungles of Jordan are all reflected in Jeremiah's
poems:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Light o' heel young camel,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Zig-zagging her tracks,</l>
<l>Heifer gone to school to the desert&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>In the heat of her passion,</l>
<l>Snapping the breeze in her lust,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Who is to turn her?</l>
</lg>
<lg>
<l>Wind off the glow of the bare desert heights,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Direct on my people,</l>
<pb n='069'/><anchor id='Pg069'/>
<l>Neither to winnow nor to sift,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>In full blast it meets me.</l>
</lg>
<lg>
<l>A lion from the jungle shall smite,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>A wolf from the wastes undo them,</l>
<l>The leopard shall prowl round their towns,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>All faring forth shall be torn.</l>
</lg>
<lg>
<l>Even the stork in the heavens</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Knoweth her seasons,</l>
<l>And dove, swift and swallow</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Keep time of their coming.</l>
</lg>
<lg>
<l>Is there no balm in Gilead,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>No healer there?<note place='foot'>ii.
23, 24; iv. 11; v. 6; viii. 7, 22.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
We need not search the botany of that province
for the suggestion of this last verse. Gilead was
the highland margin of the young prophet's view,
his threshold of hope. The sun rose across it.
</p>

<p>
The tribal territory in which Anathoth lay
was Benjamin's. Even where not actually desert
the bleak and stony soil accords with the character
given to the tribe and its few historical personages.
<hi rend='italic'>Benjamin shall ravin as a wolf.</hi><note place='foot'>Gen.
xlix. 27.</note> Of Benjamin were
the mad King Saul, the cursing Shimei, Jeremiah's
persecutors in Anathoth, and the other Saul who
breathed threatenings and slaughter against the
Church&mdash;while Jeremiah himself, in his moods of
despair, seems to have caught the temper of the
<pb n='070'/><anchor id='Pg070'/>
tribe among whom his family dwelt. Whether
in the land or in its sons it was hard, thorny
soil that needed deep ploughing.<note place='foot'>iv. 3.</note> It was, too, as
Isaiah had predicted, the main path of invasion
from the North,<note place='foot'>Is. x. 28-32.</note> by Ai, Migron, Michmash, the
Pass, Geba, Ramah, Gibeah of Saul, Laish, and
<emph>poor</emph> Anathoth herself. It had been the scene of
many massacres, and above all of the death of the
Mother of the people, who returns to bewail their
new disasters:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>A voice in Ramah is heard, lamentation</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And bitterest weeping,</l>
<l>Rachel beweeping her children,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And will not be comforted,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>For they are not.<note place='foot'>xxxi. 15.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
The cold northern rains and the tears of a
nation's history alike swept these bare uplands.
The boy grew up with many ghosts about him&mdash;not
Rachel's only but the Levite and his murdered
wife, the slaughtered troops at Gibeah and Rimmon,
Saul's sullen figure, Asahel stricken like a
roe in the wilderness of Gibeon, and the other
nameless fugitives, whom through more than one
page of the earlier books we see cut down among
the rocks of Benjamin.
</p>

<p>
The empty, shimmering desert and the stony
land thronged with such tragedies&mdash;Jeremiah
<pb n='071'/><anchor id='Pg071'/>
was born and brought up on the edge between
them.
</p>

<p>
It was a nursery not unfit for one, who might
have been (as many think), the greatest poet of
his people, had not something deeper and wider
been opened to him, with which Anathoth was
also in touch. The village is not more than an
hour's walk from Jerusalem. Social conditions
change little in the East; then, as now, the traffic
between village and city was daily and close&mdash;country
produce taken to the capital; pottery,
salted fish, spices, and the better cloths brought
back in exchange. We see how the history of
Jerusalem may have influenced the boy. Solomon's
Temple was nearly four hundred years' old.
There were the city walls, some of them still
older, the Palace and the Tombs of the Kings&mdash;perhaps
also access to the written rolls of
chroniclers and prophets. Above all, Anathoth
lay within the swirl of rumour of which the
capital was the centre. Jerusalem has always
been a tryst of the winds. It gathers echoes
from the desert far into Arabia, and news blown
up and down the great roads between Egypt and
Damascus and beyond to the Euphrates; or when
these roads are deserted and men fear to leave
their villages, news vibrating as it vibrates only
in the tremulous East, from hamlet to hamlet and
camp to camp across incredible spaces. As one
has finely said of a rumour of invasion:&mdash;
</p>

<pb n='072'/><anchor id='Pg072'/>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>I saw the tents of Cushán in affliction,</l>
<l>The curtains of Midian's land were trembling.<note place='foot'>Hab. iii.
7.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
To the north lay the more fruitful Ephraim&mdash;more
fruitful and more famous in the past than
her sister of Benjamin, but now in foreign hands,
her own people long gone into exile. It was
natural that her fate should lie heavy on the still
free but threatened homes of Benjamin, whose
northern windows looked towards her; and that
a heart like Jeremiah's should exercise itself upon
God's meaning by such a fate and the warning it
carried for the two surviving tribes.<note place='foot'>See below on ch.
iii.</note> Moreover,
Shiloh lay there, Shiloh where Eli and other
priestly ancestors had served the Ark in a sanctuary
now ruined.<note place='foot'>vii. 12-15; xxvi. 6.</note>
</p>

<p>
It was, too, across Ephraim with its mixed
population in touch with the court and markets
of Nineveh, that rumours of war usually reached
Benjamin and Judah:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Hark! They signal from Dan,</l>
<l>Mount Ephraim echoes disaster.<note place='foot'>iv. 15.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
After a period of peace, and as Jeremiah was
growing to manhood, such rumours began to
blow south again from the Euphrates. Some
thirteen years or so earlier, Asshurbanipal, the
Sardanapalus of the Greeks, had accomplished
the last Assyrian conquest in Palestine, 641 <hi rend='smallcaps'>B.C.</hi>,
<pb n='073'/><anchor id='Pg073'/>
and for an interval the land was quiet. But
towards 625 word came that the Medes were
threatening Nineveh, and, though they were repelled,
in that year Asshurbanipal died and
Nabopolassar of Babylon threw off the Assyrian
yoke. Palestine felt the grasp of Nineveh relax.
There was a stir in the air and men began to
dream. But quick upon hope fell fear. Hordes
of a new race whom&mdash;after the Greeks&mdash;we call
Scythians, the Ashguzai of the Assyrian monuments,
had half a century before swarmed over
or round the Caucasus, and since then had been
in touch, and even in some kind of alliance, with
the Assyrians. Soon after 624 they forced the
Medes to relinquish the siege of Nineveh. They
were horsemen and archers, living in the saddle,
and carrying their supplies behind them in wagons.
After (as it seems) their effective appearance at
Nineveh, they swept over the lands to the south,
as Herodotus tells us;<note place='foot'>i. 103-107 (after
Hecatæus).</note> and riding by the Syrian
coast were only brought up by bribes on the
border of Egypt.<note place='foot'>See <ref target='Appendix_I'>Appendix
I</ref>&mdash;Medes and Scythians.</note> This must have been soon
after the young prophet's call in 627-6. In
short, the world, and especially the North, was
(to use Jeremiah's word) <hi rend='italic'>boiling</hi> with events
and possibilities of which God alone knew the
end. Prophets had been produced in Israel from
<pb n='074'/><anchor id='Pg074'/>
like conditions in the previous century, and now
after a silence of nigh seventy years, prophets
were again to appear: Zephaniah, Nahum,
Habakkuk, and Jeremiah.
</p>

<p>
For these northern omens conspired with
others, ethical and therefore more articulate,
within Judah herself. It was two generations
since Isaiah and Hezekiah had died, and with
them the human possibilities of reform. For
nearly fifty years Manasseh had opposed the
pure religion of the prophets of the eighth
century, by persecution, by the introduction of
foreign and sensual cults, and especially by reviving
in the name of Israel's God<note place='foot'><q>Jerusalem,</q>
ii. 263, 264.</note> the ancient
sacrifice of children, in order to propitiate His
anger. Thus it appears that the happier interests
of religion&mdash;family feasts, pieties of seed-time
and harvest, gratitude for light, fountains and
rain, and for good fortune&mdash;were scattered among
a host both of local and of foreign deities; while
for the God of Israel, the God of Abraham,
Moses and Isaiah, the most horrible of superstitious
rites were reserved, as if all that His
people could expect of Him was the abatement of
a jealous and hungry wrath.
</p>

<p>
A few voices crying through the night had
indeed reminded Judah of what He was and
what He required. <hi rend='italic'>He hath showed thee, O man,
<pb n='075'/><anchor id='Pg075'/>
what is good; and what doth the Lord require but to do
justly, and love mercy, and walk humbly with thy God.</hi><note place='foot'>Micah
vi. 8.</note>
At last with the overthrow of Manasseh's successor,
Amon, signs of a dawn appeared. The
child of eight years who was heir to the throne
was secured, perhaps through his mother's influence,
by a party in Court and Temple that
had kept loyal to the higher faith; and the people,
probably weary of the fanatic extravagance of
Manasseh, were content to have it so.
</p>

<p>
The young King Josiah, who to the end was to
prove himself worthy of his training, and the
boy in the priest's home at Anathoth were of an
age: a fact not to be omitted from any estimate
of the influences which moulded Jeremiah in his
youth. But no trace of this appears in what he
has left us; as a boy he may never have seen the
King, and to the close of Josiah's reign he seems
to have remained too obscure to be noticed by
his monarch; yet at the last he has only good to
say of Josiah:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Did he not eat and drink,</l>
<l>And do judgment and justice?</l>
<l>The cause of the poor and the needy he judged&mdash;</l>
<l>Then was it well.<note place='foot'>xxii. 15, 16.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Attempts at reform were made soon after
Josiah's accession,<note place='foot'><q>Jerusalem,</q>
ii.</note> but little was achieved, and
that little only in the capital and its Temple.
<pb n='076'/><anchor id='Pg076'/>
In the latter for four hundred years no deity of
the land had been worshipped save Yahweh, and
He in no material form. It would be easy to remove
from the streets of Jerusalem any recently
introduced Baals and possibly, as Assyria's sovereignty
relaxed, the worship of the Host of Heaven.
But beyond Jerusalem the task was more difficult.
Every village had the shrine of a deity before the
God of Israel came to the land. The names of
these local Baalîm, or Lords, had mostly vanished,<note place='foot'>Though
not in every case, for Anathoth itself is but the
plural of the Syrian goddess Anath, as Ashtaroth is the plural of
Astart or Astarte.</note>
and Israel claimed the rural sanctuaries for
Yahweh. But the old rites, with the old conceptions
of deity attached to them, seem to have
been transferred to Him by the ignorant worshippers,
till instead of one Yahweh&mdash;one Lord&mdash;unique
in character and in power, there were as
many as there had been Baalîm, and they bore the
same inferior and sometimes repulsive characters.
We cannot exaggerate this division of the Godhead
into countless local forms:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>As many as thy cities in number</l>
<l>So many O Judah thy gods!<note place='foot'>ii. 28; xi. 13.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Their high places lay all round the Prophet and
each had its bad influence, not religious only but
ethical, not only idolatrous but immoral, with
impure rites and orgies.
</p>

<pb n='077'/><anchor id='Pg077'/>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Lift to the bare heights thine eyes,</l>
<l>Where not wast thou tumbled?</l>
<l>The land thou hast fouled with thy whoredoms,<note place='foot'>iii. 2.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
&mdash;spiritual and physical both; the one led to the
other.
</p>

<p>
This dissipation of the national mind upon
many deities was reflected in the nation's politics.
With no faith in One Supreme God the statesmen
of Judah, just as in Isaiah's earlier days, fluttered
between the great powers which were bidding
for the empire of the world. Egypt under
Psamtik's vigorous direction pressed north, flying
high promises for the restless vassals of Assyria.
But Assyria, though weakened, had not become
negligible. Between the two the anchorless policy
of Judah helplessly drifted. To use Jeremiah's
figure, suitable alike to her politics and her religion,
she was a faithless wife, off from her
husband to one paramour after another.
</p>

<p>
All this was chaos worse than the desert that
crumbled before Anathoth, a tragedy more bitter
than the past which moaned through the land
behind. What had God to say? It was a singular
mark of Israel, that the hope of a great prophet
never died from her heart. Where earnest
souls were left they prayed for his coming and
looked for the Word of the Lord by him more
than they who wait for the morning. The same
<pb n='078'/><anchor id='Pg078'/>
conditions prevailed out of which a century before
had come an Amos, a Hosea, a Micah and an
Isaiah. Israel needed judgment and the North
again stirred with its possibilities. Who would
rise and spell into a clear Word of God the thunder
which to all ears was rumbling there?
</p>

<p>
The call came to Jeremiah and, as he tells the
story, came sudden and abrupt yet charged with
the full range and weight of its ultimate meaning,
so far as he himself was concerned:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Before in the body I built thee, I knew thee,</l>
<l>Before thou wast forth of the womb, I had hallowed thee,</l>
<l>And a prophet to the nations had set thee.<note place='foot'>i. 5.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
A thought of God, ere time had anything to do
with him, or the things of time, even father or
mother, could make or could mar him; God's
alone, and sent to the world; out of the eternities
with the Divine will for these days of confusion
and panic and for the peoples, small
and great, that were struggling through them.
It was a stupendous consciousness&mdash;this that
then broke in the village of Anathoth and in the
breast of the young son of one its priests; the
spring of it deeper and the range of it wider than
even that similar assurance which centuries later
filled another priest's home in the same hill
country:&mdash;
</p>

<pb n='079'/><anchor id='Pg079'/>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>And thou, child, shalt be called the prophet of the Highest,</l>
<l>For thou shalt go before the face of the Lord,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>To prepare His ways.<note place='foot'>Luke i. 76.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
The questions of foreknowledge and predestination,
with which Jeremiah engaged himself
not a little, I leave for a future lecture.<note place='foot'>See
<ref target="Lecture_VII">Lecture vii</ref>.</note> Here
we may consider the range of his mission.
</p>

<p>
This was very wide&mdash;not for Judah only, but
<hi rend='italic'>a prophet to the nations had I set thee</hi>. The objection
has been taken, that it is too wide to be original,
and the alternative inferences drawn: either that
it is the impression of his earliest consciousness as
a prophet but formed by Jeremiah only after years
of experience revealed all that had been involved
in his call; or that it is not Jeremiah's own but
the notion formed of him by a later exaggerating
generation. It is true that Jeremiah did not
dictate the first words of the Lord to him till some
twenty-three years after he heard them, when it
was possible and natural for him to expand them
in terms of his intervening experience. And we
must remember the summary bent of the Hebrew
mind&mdash;how natural it was to that mind to describe
processes as if they were acts of a day, done by a
fiat as in the story of the Creation; or to state a
system of law and custom, which took centuries
to develop, as though it were the edict of a single
<pb n='080'/><anchor id='Pg080'/>
lawgiver and all spoken at once, when the
development entered on a new and higher stage,
as we see in the case of Deuteronomy and its
attribution to Moses.
</p>

<p>
Yet the forebodings at least of a task so vast as
that of <hi rend='italic'>prophet to the nations</hi> were anything but
impossible to the moment of Jeremiah's call;
for the time surged, as we have seen, with the
movements of the nations and their omens for his
own people. Indeed it would have been strange
if the soul of any prophet, conscious of a charge
from the Almighty, had not the instinct, that as
the meaning of this charge was gradually unfolded
to him, it would reveal, and require from him
the utterance of, Divine purposes throughout a
world so full even to the uninspired eye of the
possibilities both of the ruin of old states and of
the rise of new ones&mdash;a world so close about his
own people, and so fraught with fate for them,
that in speaking of <emph>them</emph> he could not fail to speak
of the <emph>whole of it</emph> also. If at that time a Jew had
at all the conviction that he was called to be a
prophet, it must have been with a sense of the
same responsibilities, to which the older prophets
had felt themselves bound: men who knew themselves
to be ministers of the Lord of Hosts, Lord
of the Powers of the Universe, who had dealt not
with Israel only but with Moab and Ammon
and Aram, with Tyre and the Philistines and
Egypt, and who had spoken of Assyria herself as
<pb n='081'/><anchor id='Pg081'/>
His staff and the rod of His judgment. Jeremiah's
three contemporaries, Ṣephaniah, Nahum and
Habakkuk, all deal with the foreign powers of their
day&mdash;why should he in such an age not have been
conscious from the first that his call from the Lord
of Hosts involved a mission as wide as theirs? I
am sure that if we had lived with this prophet
through his pregnant times, as we have lived
through these last ten years and have been compelled
to think constantly not of our own nation
alone&mdash;concentrated as we had to be on our duties
to her&mdash;but of <emph>all</emph> the nations of the world as
equally involved in the vast spiritual interests at
stake, we should have no difficulty in understanding
how possible and natural it was for Jeremiah
to hear his mission <emph>to the nations</emph> clearly indicated
in the very moment of his call.
</p>

<p>
And in fact Jeremiah's acknowledged Oracles&mdash;some
of them among his earliest&mdash;travel far beyond
Judah and show not merely a knowledge of, and
vivid interest in, the qualities and fortunes of other
peoples, but a wise judgment of their policies and
therefore of what should be Judah's prudent
attitude and duty towards them. For long
before his call she had been intriguing with Egypt
and Assyria.<note place='foot'>ii. 18.</note> Just then or immediately later the
Scythians, after threatening the Medes, were
sweeping over Western Asia as far as the frontier
<pb n='082'/><anchor id='Pg082'/>
of Egypt, and in his Scythian songs Jeremiah<note place='foot'>See
his seven Scythian songs below, pp. <ref target="Pg110">110</ref> ff.</note>
shows an intimate knowledge of their habits. In
his Parable of the Potter (for which unfortunately
there is no date) he declares God's power to
mould or re-mould <emph>any</emph> nation.<note place='foot'>xviii.</note> And Baruch,
writing of Jeremiah's earlier ministry, says that
he spoke <emph>concerning all nations</emph>.<note place='foot'>xxxvi.
2, a clause which Duhm merely on the grounds of his
theory is obliged to regard as a later intrusion, though it bears
no marks of being such.</note>
</p>

<p>
No wonder that Jeremiah shrank from such a
task: <hi rend='italic'>Ah, Lord God, I know not to speak, I am too
young.</hi><note place='foot'>So Cornill after the
Greek.</note> His excuse is interesting. Had he not
developed his gift for verse? Or, conscious
of its rustic simplicity, did he fear to take the
prophet's thunder on lips, that had hitherto moved
only to the music of his country-side? In the
light of his later experience the second alternative
is not impossible. When much practice must have
made him confident of his art as a singer, he tells
us how burning he felt the Word of the Lord to
be. But whatever was the motive of his reluctance
it was overcome. As he afterwards said:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Ah, Lord, Thou didst beguile me,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And beguiled I let myself be;</l>
<l>Thou wast too strong for me</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And hast prevailed.<note place='foot'>xx. 7.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<pb n='083'/><anchor id='Pg083'/>

<p>
The following shows how this came about:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
And the Lord said unto me, Say not I am
too young, for to all to which I send thee
thou shalt go, and all I command thee thou
shalt speak,
</p>
<lg>
<l>Be not afraid before them</l>
<l>For with thee am I to deliver,</l>
</lg>
<p>
Rede of the Lord. And the Lord put forth
His hand and caused it to touch my mouth,
and the Lord said to me, Lo, I have set My
Word in thy mouth,
</p>
<lg>
<l>See I appoint thee this day</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Over the nations and kingdoms,</l>
<l>To pull up and tear down and destroy,<note place='foot'>Hebrew
adds the redundant <hi rend='italic'>to pull down</hi>; Greek omits.</note></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>To build and to plant.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
To this also objection has been taken as still more
incredible in the spiritual experience of so youthful
a rustic. It has been deemed the exaggeration
of a later age, and described as the <q>gigantic
figure</q> of a <q>plenipotentiary to the nations,</q>
utterly inconsistent with the modest singer of
the genuine oracles of Jeremiah, <q>a hero only in
suffering, not in assault.</q><note place='foot'>Duhm; see above, p.
<ref target="Pg040">40</ref>.</note> Such an objection rather
strains the meaning of the passage. According
to this Jeremiah is to be the carrier of the Word
of the Lord. That Word, rather than the man
<pb n='084'/><anchor id='Pg084'/>
himself, is the power <hi rend='italic'>to pull up and tear down and
destroy, to build and to plant</hi><note place='foot'>This is clear
from other passages, v. 14; xviii. 7-10, etc.</note>&mdash;that Word which no
Hebrew prophet received without an instinct of
its world-wide range and its powers of both
destruction and creation.
</p>

<p>
Two visions follow. To appreciate the first we
must remember the natural anxiety of the prophets
when charged with pronouncements so
weighty and definite. The Word, the ethical
purpose of God for Israel was clear, but how was
it to be fulfilled? No strength appeared in the
nation itself. The party, or parties, loyal to the
Lord had been in power a dozen years and
effected little in Jerusalem and nothing beyond.
The people were not stirred and seemed hopeless.
Living in a village where little changed through
the years, but men followed the habits of their
fathers, Jeremiah felt everything dead. Winter
was on and the world asleep.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
Then the Word of the Lord came to me
saying, What art thou seeing, Jeremiah;
and I said, I am seeing the branch of an
almond tree. And the Lord said to me,
Well hast thou seen, for I am awake over
My Word to perform it.
</quote>

<p>
The Hebrew for almond tree is <hi rend='italic'>shākēdh</hi>, which
also means <hi rend='italic'>awakeness</hi> or
<hi rend='italic'>watchfulness</hi>,<note place='foot'>Ball happily translates
<hi rend='italic'>wake-tree</hi>.</note> and the
<pb n='085'/><anchor id='Pg085'/>
Lord was <emph>awake</emph> or was
<emph>watchful</emph>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>shōkēdh</hi>&mdash;the
difference only of a vowel. In that first token of
spring which a Palestine winter affords, the Prophet
received the sacrament of his call and of the
assurance that God was awake! That the sacrament
took this form was natural. That of Isaiah
of Jerusalem was the vision of a Throne and an
Altar. That of Ezekiel, the exile, shone in the
stormy skies of his captivity. This to the prophet
of Anathoth burst with the first blossom on his
wintry fields. The sense of unity in which he
and his people conceived the natural and spiritual
worlds came to his help; neither in the one world
nor in the other did God slumber. God was
watching.
</p>

<p>
The Second Vision needs no comment after
our survey of the political conditions of the time.
The North held the forces for the fulfilling of the
Word. The Vision is followed by a charge to
the Prophet himself.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
And the word of the Lord came to me
the second time, What art thou seeing?
And I said, A caldron boiling and its face is
from (?) the North.<note place='foot'>The text reads,
<hi rend='italic'>its face is from the face of northwards</hi>,
which some would emend to <hi rend='italic'>its face is turned northwards</hi>, i.e.
the side on which it is blown upon and made to boil. <hi rend='italic'>Boiling</hi> or
<hi rend='italic'>bubbling</hi>, lit. <hi rend='italic'>blown upon,
fanned</hi>.</note> And the Lord said unto
me:&mdash;
</p>
<pb n='086'/><anchor id='Pg086'/>
<lg>
<l>Out of the North shall evil boil forth<note place='foot'>After
the Greek; Hebrew has <hi rend='italic'>be opened</hi>.</note></l>
<l>On all that dwell in the land;</l>
<l>For behold, I am calling</l>
<l>All the realms<note place='foot'>Hebrew has
<hi rend='italic'>races and kingdoms</hi> and adds <hi rend='italic'>Rede of the
Lord</hi>.</note> of the North.</l>
<l>They shall come and each set his throne</l>
<l>In the openings of the gates of Jerusalem,</l>
<l>On all of her walls round about,</l>
<l>And every township of Judah.</l>
<l>And My judgments by them<note place='foot'>Read אתם with points Chireq
and Qamets.</note> shall I utter</l>
<l>On the evil of those who have left Me,</l>
<l>Who have burned to other gods</l>
<l>And bowed to the works of their hands.</l>
</lg>
<lg>
<l>But thou shalt gird up thy loins,</l>
<l>Stand up and speak<note place='foot'>Hebrew adds
<hi rend='italic'>to them</hi>; Greek omits.</note> all I charge thee.</l>
<l>Be not dismayed before them,</l>
<l>Lest to their face I dismay thee.</l>
<l>See I have thee set this day</l>
<l>A fenced city and walls of bronze</l>
<l>To the kings and princes of Judah,</l>
<l>Her priests and the folk of the land;</l>
<l>They shall fight but master thee never,</l>
<l>For with thee am I to deliver&mdash;</l>
<l>Rede of the Lord.<note place='foot'>The last three
couplets are uncertain. In v. 18 Hebrew adds <hi rend='italic'>a
basalt pillar</hi> and, after <hi rend='italic'>bronze,
against all the land</hi>.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<pb n='087'/><anchor id='Pg087'/>

<p>
Jeremiah was silenced and went forth to his
ministry&mdash;the Word upon his lips and the Lord
by his side.
</p>

<p>
Two further observations are natural.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>First</hi>, note the contrast between the two
Visions&mdash;the blossoming twig and the boiling
caldron brewing tempests from the North. Unrelated
as these seem, they symbolise together
Jeremiah's prophesying throughout. For in fact
this was all blossom and storm, beauty and terror,
tender yearning and thunders of doom&mdash;up to the
very end. Or to state the same more deeply:
while the caldron of the North never ceased boiling
out over his world&mdash;consuming the peoples,
his own among them, and finally sweeping him
into exile and night&mdash;he never, for himself or for
Israel, lost the clear note of his first Vision, that
all was watched and controlled. There is his
value to ourselves. Jeremiah was no prophet of
hope, but he was the prophet of that without
which hope is impossible&mdash;faith in Control&mdash;that
be the times dark and confused as they may, and
the world's movements ruthless, ruinous and
inevitable, God yet watches and rules all to
the fulfilment of His Will&mdash;though how we see
not, nor can any prophet tell us.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Second</hi>, note how the story leaves the issue, not
with one will only, but with two&mdash;God's and the
Man's, whom God has called. His family has
been discounted, his people and their authorities,
<pb n='088'/><anchor id='Pg088'/>
political and religious, are to be against him. <emph>He</emph>
is to stand up and speak, <emph>He</emph> is not to let himself
be dismayed before them, lest God make him dismayed.
Under God, then, the Individual becomes
everything. Here, at the start of his ministry,
Jeremiah has pressed upon him, the separateness,
the awful responsibility, the power, of the Single
Soul. We shall see how the significance of this
developed not for himself only, but for the whole
religion of Israel.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='089'/><anchor id='Pg089'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index="toc" level1="Lecture IV. The Prophet In The Reign Of Josiah."/>
<index index="pdf" level1="Lecture IV."/>
<head type='sub'>Lecture IV.</head>
<head>The Prophet In The Reign Of Josiah.
627-26-608 <hi rend='smallcaps'>B.C.</hi></head>

<p>
This period of the Prophet's career may be taken
in three divisions:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>First</hi>, His Earliest Oracles, which reflect the
lavish distribution of the high-places in Judah and
Benjamin, and may therefore be dated before the
suppression of these by King Josiah, in obedience
to the Law-Book discovered in the Temple in
621-20 <hi rend='smallcaps'>B.C.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Second</hi>, His Oracles on the Scythians, whose
invasions also preceded that year; with additions.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Third</hi>, Oracles which imply that the enforcement
of the Law-Book had already begun, and
reveal Jeremiah's attitude to it and to the course
of the reforms which it inspired.
</p>

<p>
We must keep in mind that the Prophet did not
dictate his early Oracles till the year 604-03, and
that he added to them on the Second Roll <hi rend='italic'>many
like words</hi>.<note place='foot'>xxxvi. 32;
see pp. <ref target="Pg022">22</ref> ff.</note>
We shall thus be prepared for the
appearance among them of references to the
<pb n='090'/><anchor id='Pg090'/>
changed conditions of this later date, when the
Scythians had long come and gone, the Assyrian
Empire had collapsed, its rival Egypt had been
defeated at the Battle of Carchemish, and
Nebuchadrezzar and his Chaldeans were masters
of Western Asia.
</p>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<head>1. His Earliest Oracles. (II. 2-IV. 4.)</head>

<p>
These bear few marks of the later date at which
they were dictated by Jeremiah&mdash;in fact only a
probable reference to Egypt's invasion of Palestine
in 608, Ch. II. 16, and part, if not all, of Ch. III.
6-18. The general theme is a historical retrospect&mdash;Israel's
early loyalty to her God, and her subsequent
declension to the worship of other gods,
figured as adultery; along with a profession of
penitence by the people, to which God responds
by a stern call to a deeper repentance and
thorough reform; failing this, her doom, though
vaguely described as yet, is inevitable. The
nation is addressed as a whole at first in the
second person singular feminine, but soon also
in the plural, and the plural prevails towards the
end. The nation answers as a whole, sometimes
as <emph>I</emph> but sometimes also as <emph>We</emph>.
</p>

<p>
Before expounding the truths conveyed by
these early Oracles it is well to translate them in
full, for though not originally uttered at the same
time, they run now in a continuous stream of
<pb n='091'/><anchor id='Pg091'/>
verse&mdash;save for one of those <q>portages</q> of prose
which I have described.<note place='foot'>P.
<ref target="Pg037">37</ref>.</note> There is no reason for
denying the whole of this passage to Jeremiah,
whether because it is in prose or because it treats
of Northern Israel as well as Judah.<note place='foot'>See
pp. <ref target="Pg040">40</ref> f., <ref target="Pg072">72</ref>.</note> But on
parts of it the colours are distinctly of a period
later than that of the Prophet. All the rest of
the Oracles may be taken to be from himself.
Duhm after much hesitation has come to doubt
the genuineness of Ch. II. 5-13, but his suspicions
of deuteronomic influence seem groundless, and
even if they were sound they would be insufficient
for denying the verses to Jeremiah.<note place='foot'>See
p. <ref target="Pg041">41</ref>.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
II. 1, 2, And he said, Thus sayeth the Lord:<note place='foot'>So
simply the Greek; the Hebrew, <hi rend='italic'>And the word of the Lord
came unto me saying, Go and proclaim in the ears of Jerusalem
saying</hi>, not only betrays an editorial redundancy, but what follows
is addressed not to Jerusalem but to all Israel. Here if anywhere
the Greek has the original. Jeremiah begins thus to dictate to
Baruch.</note>
</p>
<lg>
<l>I remember the troth of thy youth,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Thy love as a bride,</l>
<l>Thy following Me through the desert,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The land unsown.</l>
<l>Holy to the Lord was Israel,&nbsp;&nbsp;3</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>First-fruit of His income;</l>
<l>All that would eat it stood guilty,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Evil came on them.</l>
<l>Rede of the Lord&mdash;</l>
<pb n='092'/><anchor id='Pg092'/>
<l>Hear the Lord's Word, House of Jacob,&nbsp;&nbsp;4</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>All clans of Israel's race!</l>
<l>[Thus sayeth the Lord]&nbsp;&nbsp;5</l>
<l>What wrong found your fathers in Me,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>That so far they broke from Me,</l>
<l>And following after the Bubble<note place='foot'>Hebrew
<hi rend='italic'>kebel</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>breath</hi>.</note></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Bubbles became.</l>
<l>Nor said they:&nbsp;&nbsp;6</l>
<l>Where is the Lord who carried us up</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>From the land of
Miṣraim?<note place='foot'>Egypt.</note></l>
<l>Who led us through the desert,</l>
<l>Land of waste and chasms,</l>
<l>Land of drought and barren,<note place='foot'>So Greek.</note></l>
<l>A land which nobody crosses,</l>
<l>Nor mankind settles upon it.</l>
<l>And I brought you into a garden,&nbsp;&nbsp;7</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>To feed on its fruit and its wealth.</l>
<l>But coming ye fouled My land,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>My heritage turned to loathing.</l>
<l>The priests never said,&nbsp;&nbsp;8</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Where is the Lord?</l>
<l>They who handle the Law knew Me not,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The rulers<note place='foot'>Lit.
<hi rend='italic'>shepherds</hi>.</note> rebelled against Me;</l>
<l>By Baal the prophets did prophesy,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And followed the worthless.</l>
<l>So still with you must I strive,<note place='foot'>Hebrew adds
<hi rend='italic'>Rede of the Lord</hi>.</note>&nbsp;&nbsp;9</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And strive with your sons.<note place='foot'>Some
Hebrew MSS. and Vulgate.</note></l>
<pb n='093'/><anchor id='Pg093'/>
<l>For cross to the isles of Kittîm and look&nbsp;&nbsp;10</l>
<l>Send to Kedár, and think for yourselves,<note place='foot'>Cyprus = Kittim
and Kedár, an Arab tribe, are the extremes
of the world then known to the Jews.</note></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And see, was ever like this?</l>
<l>Have any nations<note place='foot'>So Greek.</note> changed their
gods,&nbsp;&nbsp;11</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And these no gods at all?</l>
<l>Yet My people exchanged their<note place='foot'>Hebrew marg.
<hi rend='italic'>my</hi>.</note> Glory</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>For that which is worthless.</l>
<l>Be heavy,<note place='foot'>Or <hi rend='italic'>heave</hi> (Ball),
lit. <hi rend='italic'>be aghast</hi> but the Hebrew is alliterative,
<hi rend='italic'>shommû shamaîm</hi>.</note> O heavens, for this,&nbsp;&nbsp;12</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Shudder and shudder again!</l>
<l>Twain the wrongs My people have wrought&mdash;&nbsp;&nbsp;13</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Me have they left,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The Fount of live water,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>To hew themselves cisterns,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Cisterns broken,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>That cannot hold water!</l>
</lg>
<lg>
<l>Israel a slave!&nbsp;&nbsp;14</l>
<l>Or house-born serf!</l>
<l>Why he for a prey?</l>
<l>Against him the young lions roar,&nbsp;&nbsp;15</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Give forth their voice,</l>
<l>And his land they lay waste,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Burned are his towns and tenantless.</l>
<pb n='094'/><anchor id='Pg094'/>
<l>The sons, too, of Noph and Taḥpanḥes have forced,&nbsp;&nbsp;16</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Have abused thee.<note place='foot'>This
couplet is after the Greek, Hebrew has <hi rend='italic'>browsed on
thy skull</hi> for <hi rend='italic'>forced</hi>. Noph = Memphis, Egypt's capital;
Taḥpanḥes = Daphne on the Egyptian road to Palestine.
Either 14-19 or more probably 16 alone is one of Jeremiah's
additions to his earlier Oracles after Egypt's invasion of Palestine
in 608.</note></l>
<l>Is not all this being done thee&nbsp;&nbsp;17</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>For thy leaving of Me?<note place='foot'>So
Greek; Hebrew adds, <hi rend='italic'>when he led thee by the way</hi>.</note></l>
<l>And now what to thee is the road to Miṣraim,<note place='foot'>Miṣraim
= Egypt.</note></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Nile's waters to drink?</l>
<l>Or what is to thee the road to Asshúr,&nbsp;&nbsp;18</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>To drink of the River?</l>
<l>Be thy scourge thine own sin,&nbsp;&nbsp;19</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Thy doublings convict thee!</l>
<l>Know and see how sore for thyself,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>How bitter to leave Me!</l>
<l>But never was awe of Me thine&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Rede of the Lord thy God.<note place='foot'>These
last four lines follow the Greek.</note></l>
</lg>
<lg>
<l>From of old thou hast broken thy yoke,&nbsp;&nbsp;20</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Hast burst thy bonds,</l>
<l>Saying, <q>I will not serve!</q></l>
<l>While upon every high hill,</l>
<l>And under each rustling tree,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Harlot thou sprawlest!</l>
<pb n='095'/><anchor id='Pg095'/>
<l>Yet a noble vine did I plant thee,&nbsp;&nbsp;21</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Wholly true seed;</l>
<l>How could'st thou change to a corrupt,<note place='foot'>So
Duhm by a better division of words.</note></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>A wildling grape?</l>
<l>Yea, though thou scour thee with nitre,&nbsp;&nbsp;22</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And heap to thee lye,</l>
<l>Ingrained is thy guilt before Me,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Rede of the Lord, thy God.<note place='foot'>So
the Greek.</note></l>
<l>How sayest thou, <q rend='pre'>I'm not defiled,</q>&nbsp;&nbsp;23</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='post'>Nor gone after the Baals.</q></l>
<l>Look at thy ways in the Valley,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And own thy deeds!</l>
<l>A young camel, light o' heel,<note place='foot'>The Hebrew
<hi rend='italic'>ḳal</hi> seems to combine here its two meanings of
<hi rend='italic'>swift</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>trifling</hi>.</note></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Zig-zagging her tracks,</l>
<l>A heifer, schooled to the desert&mdash;&nbsp;&nbsp;24</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>In the heat of her lust,</l>
<l>Snapping the wind in her passion,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Who is to turn her?</l>
<l>None that would seek her need strain them,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>In her month they shall find her.</l>
<l>Save thou thy feet from the peeling,&nbsp;&nbsp;25</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Thy throat from thirst!</l>
<l>But thou sayest, <q rend='pre'>No use!</q><note place='foot'>Hebrew
<hi rend='italic'>no' ash</hi>; with Greek delete the second
<hi rend='italic'>no</hi>.</note></l>
<l>For with strangers I'm fallen in love,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='post'>Them must I after!</q></l>
<pb n='096'/><anchor id='Pg096'/>
<l>Like the shame of the thief when he's caught,&nbsp;&nbsp;26</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Shall Israel's sons<note place='foot'>So
Greek.</note> be shamed.</l>
<l>[They and their kings and their princes,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their priests and their prophets]<note place='foot'>The
insertion (by a copyist?) of this formula rather weakens
the connection.</note></l>
<l>Who say to a stock <q>Thou my Father!</q>&nbsp;&nbsp;27</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>To a stone <q>Thou hast borne me!</q></l>
<l>Their<note place='foot'>So some Versions.</note> backs they have turned to Me</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Never their<note place='foot'>Greek adds
<hi rend='italic'>and as the number of streets in Jerusalem they
burn to Baal</hi>; cp. xi. 13.</note> faces.</l>
<l>Yet in time of their trouble they say</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>Rise up and save us!</q></l>
<l>Where be thy gods thou hast made thee?&nbsp;&nbsp;28</l>
<l>Let them rise, if so they may save thee</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>In time of thy trouble;</l>
<l>For as thy townships in number,<note place='foot'>So Greek.</note></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>So be, O Judah, thy gods!</l>
<l>What quarrel have you against Me?&nbsp;&nbsp;29</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>All you are the sinners;<note place='foot'>Greek.</note></l>
<l>Against Me you all have rebelled&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Rede of the Lord.</l>
<l>In vain have I smitten your sons&nbsp;&nbsp;30</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Ye<note place='foot'>Greek.</note> took not correction</l>
<l>Your<note place='foot'>Greek <hi rend='italic'>the</hi>.</note>
sword has devoured your prophets,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Like a ravaging lion.</l>
<pb n='097'/><anchor id='Pg097'/>
<l>O generation&mdash;you!&mdash;look at the Word of the Lord!<note place='foot'>Prose,
probably a later insertion when the prophet dictated
his Oracles. See pp. <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref> f.</note>&nbsp;&nbsp;31</l>
<l>Have I been a desert to Israel,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Or land of thick darkness?</l>
<l>Why say My folk <q rend='pre'>We are off,</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='post'>No more to meet Thee!</q></l>
<l>Can a maiden forget her adorning,&nbsp;&nbsp;32</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Or her girdle a bride?</l>
<l>Yet Me have My people forgotten,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Days without number!</l>
<l>Why trimmest thou still thy ways&nbsp;&nbsp;33</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>To seek after love?</l>
<l>Therefore thou also to evil</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Thy ways hast trained:<note place='foot'>The
text of this quatrain is corrupt, the rendering above
makes use of the versions.</note></l>
<l>Yea, on thy skirts is found blood&nbsp;&nbsp;34</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Of innocent souls,</l>
<l>Not only on felons(?) I find it</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>But over all these.<note place='foot'>The
text of this verse too is uncertain. For <hi rend='italic'>skirts</hi> Greek has
<hi rend='italic'>hands</hi>; to <hi rend='italic'>innocent</hi> Hebrew adds
<hi rend='italic'>needy</hi>. Some read the second couplet
[<hi rend='italic'>though</hi>] <hi rend='italic'>thou did'st not catch
them breaking in, but because of all these</hi>, i.e. thy sins against Me, thou did'st
murder them.</note></l>
<l>Yet thou said'st, <q rend='pre'>I am assoiled,</q>&nbsp;&nbsp;35</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='post'>Sure His wrath turns from me!</q></l>
<l>Behold I am going to judge thee</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>For saying, <q>I'm sinless!</q></l>
<pb n='098'/><anchor id='Pg098'/>
<l>How very light dost thou take it,&nbsp;&nbsp;36</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>To change thy ways!</l>
<l>E'en of Miṣraim shalt thou be ashamed<note place='foot'>Or
<hi rend='italic'>balked</hi>.</note></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>As ashamed of Ashshúr.</l>
<l>Out of this too shalt thou come&nbsp;&nbsp;37</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>With thy hands on thy head,</l>
<l>For spurned hath the Lord the things of thy trust,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Not by them shalt thou prosper!</l>
</lg>
<p>
III. 1. [Saying]:&mdash;If a man dismiss his wife and she go from
him and become another man's, shall she return to
him?<note place='foot'>Greek.</note> Is that woman<note place='foot'>Greek;
Hebrew <hi rend='italic'>land</hi>.</note> not too polluted?
But thou hast played the harlot with many
lovers and&mdash;wouldest return unto Me? Rede
of the Lord.
</p>
<lg>
<l>Lift to the clearings thine eyes,&nbsp;&nbsp;2</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Where not wast thou tumbled?</l>
<l>For them by the roads thou hast sate,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Like an Arab in desert,</l>
<l>Thou hast fouled the land with thy whoredoms</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And with thy vices;</l>
<l>With thy lovers so many&nbsp;&nbsp;3</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>It has meant but thy snare.<note place='foot'>So
Duhm after the Greek. Hebrew is impossible.</note></l>
<l>The brow of a harlot was thine,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Shame thou hadst done with.</l>
<pb n='099'/><anchor id='Pg099'/>
<l>But now&mdash;thou callest me <q rend='pre'>Father,</q>&nbsp;&nbsp;4</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='post'>Friend of my youth!</q></l>
<l><q rend='pre'>Bears <hi rend='italic'>He</hi> a grudge for ever,</q>&nbsp;&nbsp;5</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='post'>Stands on His guard for
aye?</q><note place='foot'>The two Hebrew verbs in this couplet,
<hi rend='italic'>naṭar</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>shamar</hi> mean
<hi rend='italic'>to keep</hi> (or <hi rend='italic'>maintain</hi>) and
<hi rend='italic'>to watch</hi>; they are usually transitive and (in the sense here
intended) are followed by a noun, <hi rend='italic'>anger</hi> or
<hi rend='italic'>wrath</hi>, which English versions supply here.
But its absence from <emph>both</emph> the Hebrew and Greek texts leads us
to take the verbs as intransitive, as is the case with <hi rend='italic'>naṭar</hi>
in New-Hebrew.</note></l>
<l>Lo, so thou hast spoken, yet done</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Ills to thine utmost.</l>
</lg>
<p>
6. And the Lord said unto me in the days of
Josiah, the king,<note place='foot'>Verses 6-18,
in prose break the connection both of style and
meaning between 5 and 19 and cannot in whole be Jeremiah's or
from his period. This is especially true of 16-18 which assume
the destruction of the Ark and the Exile of Judah as well as
of Israel as already actual. But the passage probably contains
genuine fragments from Jeremiah.</note> Hast thou seen what recreant
Israel did to Me<note place='foot'>So Greek.</note> going up every high
hill and under each rustling tree, and there
playing the harlot. 7. And I said, After she has
done all these things can she return to Me?&mdash;and
she did not return. 8. And her treacherous
sister Judah saw, yes she saw,<note place='foot'>So one Hebrew MS. and
Syriac.</note> that, all because
recreant Israel committed adultery, I
had dismissed her and given her the bill of
her divorce; yet her sister treacherous Judah
<pb n='100'/><anchor id='Pg100'/>
was not afraid, but also went and played the
harlot. 9. And it came to pass that, through the
wantonness of her harlotry, she polluted the
land, committing adultery with stones and with
stocks. 10. And yet, for all this, treacherous
Judah<note place='foot'>Hebrew adds <hi rend='italic'>her
sister</hi>.</note> has not returned to Me with all her
heart, but only in feigning.<note place='foot'>Hebrew adds
<hi rend='italic'>Rede of the Lord</hi>.</note>
11. And the Lord said to me, Recreant Israel
hath justified herself more than treacherous
Judah. 12. Go and call out these words toward
the North and say,
</p>
<lg>
<l>Turn thee to Me,<note place='foot'>So Greek.</note> recreant Israel,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>I frown<note place='foot'>Lit.
<hi rend='italic'>make not My face to fall</hi>.</note> not upon thee;</l>
<l>For gracious am I (Rede of the Lord),</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Nor for ever bear grudge.</l>
<l>Only acknowledge thy guilt,&nbsp;&nbsp;13</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>That defying the Lord thy God,</l>
<l>Thou hast scattered to strangers thy ways</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Under each rustling tree,</l>
<l>And hast<note place='foot'>Greek; Hebrew <hi rend='italic'>ye have</hi>.</note>
not obeyed My voice&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Rede of the Lord.</l>
</lg>
<p>
14. [Return ye backsliding children, Rede of the
Lord, for I am your Baal,<note place='foot'>That is
<hi rend='italic'>Lord</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Husband</hi>.</note> and I will take
you, one from a city and two from a clan, and
<pb n='101'/><anchor id='Pg101'/>
will bring you to Ṣion. 15. And I will give you
Shepherds after My heart, and they shall
shepherd you with knowledge and with skill.
16. And it shall be, when ye multiply and increase
in the land in those days (Rede of the Lord),
they shall not again say, <q>The Ark of the
Covenant of the Lord!</q> It shall not come to
mind, it shall be neither remembered nor
missed,<note place='foot'>So Greek.</note> nor shall it be made again.
17. At that time they shall call Jerusalem the
Throne of the Lord and all nations shall
gather to her,<note place='foot'>Hebrew adds
<hi rend='italic'>to the Name of the Lord to Jerusalem</hi>.</note>
nor walk any more after the
stubbornness of their evil hearts. 18. In those
days the House of Judah shall walk with the
House of Israel, that together they may come
from the land of the North to the land which
I gave their<note place='foot'>So Greek; Hebrew <hi rend='italic'>your</hi>;
after <hi rend='italic'>North</hi> Greek has <hi rend='italic'>and from
all lands</hi>.</note> fathers for a heritage.]
</p>
<lg>
<l>But I<note place='foot'>In antithesis to verse 5 of which it is the immediate sequel
both in sense and metre.</note> had declared the How(?)&nbsp;&nbsp;19</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>I should set thee<note place='foot'>Feminine, i.e.
Judah was a daughter, and a son's portion was
designed for her.</note> among the sons,</l>
<l>And should give thee a land of delight,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Fairest domain of the nations.</l>
<pb n='102'/><anchor id='Pg102'/>
<l>And said, Thou would'st call Me Father,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Nor from after Me turn.</l>
<l>As a woman plays false to her fere,<note place='foot'>So finely
Ball.</note>&nbsp;&nbsp;20</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>So to Me ye played false!</l>
<l>[O House of Israel, Rede of the Lord.]</l>
</lg>
<lg>
<l>Hark!&nbsp;&nbsp;21</l>
<l>From the clearings weeping is heard,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Wailing of Israel's sons,</l>
<l>That they have perverted their way,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Forgotten the Lord their God.</l>
<l>Return ye oft-turning children,&nbsp;&nbsp;22</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Let me heal your back-turnings!</l>
<l><q rend='pre'>Here are we! to Thee we are come,</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Thou Lord art our God.</l>
<l><q rend='pre'>Surely the heights are a fraud</q>&nbsp;&nbsp;23</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The hills and their hubbub!<note place='foot'>The
riotous festivals on the high-places.</note></l>
<l><q rend='pre'>Alone in the Lord our God</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Is Israel's safety.</l>
<l><q rend='pre'>The Baal hath devoured our toil</q>&nbsp;&nbsp;24</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And our sires' from their youth,</l>
<l><q rend='pre'>Their flocks and their herds,</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their sons and daughters&mdash;</l>
<l><q rend='pre'>Lie we low in our shame,</q>&nbsp;&nbsp;25</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Our dishonour enshroud us!</l>
<l><q rend='pre'>For to our God<note place='foot'>Hebrew adds
<hi rend='italic'>the Lord</hi>.</note> have we sinned,</q></l>
<l><q rend='pre'>[We and our sires from our youth]</q></l>
<pb n='103'/><anchor id='Pg103'/>
<l>Up to this day!</l>
<l><q rend='pre'>Nor have heeded the voice</q></l>
<l><q rend='post'>Of the Lord our God.</q></l>
</lg>
<lg>
<l>[Israel, if thou wilt return,&nbsp;&nbsp;IV. 1</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Return to Me,</l>
<l>And thy loathly things put from thy mouth</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Nor stray from My face.<note place='foot'>This
couplet after the Greek.</note></l>
<l>If in truth thou swear by the life of the Lord,&nbsp;&nbsp;2</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Honest and straight,</l>
<l>Then the nations shall bless them by Him</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And in Him shall they glory.]<note place='foot'>I
agree with Cornill and Skinner that these two verses
are a later addition. The answer to the people's confession
comes in verses 3 and 4.</note></l>
</lg>
<p>
3. Thus saith the Lord to the men of Judah and
to the inhabitants of<note place='foot'>So some Hebrew MSS. and versions.</note>
Jerusalem:
</p>
<lg>
<l>Fallow up your fallow-ground,<note place='foot'>Hebrew
<hi rend='italic'>nirû lakeḿ nîr</hi>; also in English the noun and verb
are the same&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>to fallow</hi> or
<hi rend='italic'>fallow up</hi> = <hi rend='italic'>to break</hi> or
<hi rend='italic'>plough up</hi>.</note></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And sow not on thorns!</l>
<l>To your God<note place='foot'>So Greek and other versions.</note>
circumcise ye,&nbsp;&nbsp;4</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Off from your heart with the foreskin!</l>
<l>[O men of Judah and inhabitants of Jerusalem]</l>
<l>Lest My fury break out like fire,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And burn with none to quench!</l>
<l>[Because of the ill of your doings.]</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<pb n='104'/><anchor id='Pg104'/>

<p>
From his call the Prophet went forth, as we
saw, with a heavy sense of the responsibility and
the power of the single soul, so far as he himself
was concerned; and while we study his ministry
we shall find him coming to feel the same for
each of his fellow-men. But in these his earliest
utterances he follows his predecessors, and
especially Hosea, in addressing his people as a
whole, and treating Israel as a moral unit from
the beginning of her history to the moment of
his charge to her. He continues the figures
which Hosea had used. Long ago in Egypt God
chose Israel for His child, for His bride, and led
her through the desert to a fair and fruitful land
of her own. Then her love was true. The term
used for it, <hi rend='italic'>ḥeṣedh</hi>, is more than an affection; it is
loyalty to a relation. To translate it but <hi rend='italic'>kindness</hi>
or <hi rend='italic'>mercy</hi>, as is usually done, is
wrong&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>troth</hi> is
our nearest word.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>I remember the troth of thy youth,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Thy love as a bride,</l>
<l>Thy following Me through the desert,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The land unsown.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Upon the unsown land there were no rival
gods. But in fertile Canaan the nation encountered
innumerable local deities, the Baalîm,
husbands of the land, begetters of its fruits and
lords of its waters. We conceive how tempting
these Baalîm were both to the superstitious
<pb n='105'/><anchor id='Pg105'/>
prudence of tribes strange to agriculture and
anxious to conciliate the traditional powers
thereof; and to the people's passions through the
sensuous rites and feasts of the rural shrines.
Among such distractions Israel lost her innocence,
forgot what her own God was or had done for
her, and ceased to enquire of Him. Hence her
present vices and misery in contrast with her
early troth and safety. Hence the twin evils
of the time&mdash;on the one hand the nation's trust
in heathen powers and silly oscillation between
Egypt and Assyria; on the other the gross
immoralities to which the Baals had seduced its
sons. There was a double prostitution, to gods
and to men, so foul that the young prophet uses
the rankest facts in the rural life which he is
addressing in order to describe it.
</p>

<p>
The cardinal sin of the people, the source of
all their woes is religious,
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Is not this being done thee</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>For thy leaving of Me?</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
This was so, not only because He was their
ancestral God&mdash;though such an apostasy was
unheard of among the nations&mdash;but because He
was such a God and had done so much for them;
because from the first He had wrought both with
grace and with might, while the gods they went
after had neither character nor efficiency&mdash;mere
breaths, mere bubbles!
</p>

<pb n='106'/><anchor id='Pg106'/>

<p>
The nerve of the faith of the prophets was this
memory&mdash;that their God was love and in love
had wrought for His people. The frequent
expression of this by the prophets and by
Deuteronomy, the prophetic edition of the Law,
is the answer to those abstractions to which some
academic moderns have sought to reduce the
Object of Israel's religion&mdash;such as, <q>a tendency
not ourselves that makes for righteousness.</q>
The God of Israel was Righteous and demanded
righteousness from men; but to begin with He
was Love which sought their love in return.
First the Exodus then Sinai; first Redemption
then Law; first Love then Discipline. Through
His Deeds and His Word by the prophets He
had made all this clear and very plain.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>What wrong found your fathers in Me,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>That so far they broke from Me?</l>
<l>Have I been a desert to Israel,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Or land of thick darkness?</l>
<l>Why say My folk, <q rend='pre'>We are off,</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='post'>To meet Thee no more.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Jeremiah has prefaced this Divine challenge with
a passionate exclamation in prose&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>O
Generation&mdash;you!&mdash;look
at the Word of the Lord!</hi>&mdash;which (as I
have said) I like to think was added to his earlier
verses when he dictated these to Baruch. Cannot
you see, cannot you see? He is amazed by the
stupidity, the callousness, the abandonment with
<pb n='107'/><anchor id='Pg107'/>
which his people from their leaders down have
treated a guidance so clear, a love so constant
and yearning. And again his soul sways upon
the contrast between the early innocence and the
present corruption of Israel.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>A noble vine did I plant thee,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Wholly true seed,</l>
<l>How could'st thou change to a corrupt,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>A wildling grape?</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
The sense of their terrible guilt governs him, and
of their indifference to it, saying we are clean,
to which he answers:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Yea though thou scour thee with nitre</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And heap to thee lye,</l>
<l>Ingrained is thy guilt before Me&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Rede of the Lord.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Yet the fervency with which he pleads the
Divine Love reveals a heart of hunger, if hardly
of hope, for his nation's repentance. Indeed apart
from his own love for them he could not have
followed Hosea so closely as he does at this stage
of his career, without feeling some possibility of
their recovery from even this, their awful worst;
and his ear strains for a sign of it. Like Hosea
he hears what sounds like the surge of a national
repentance<note place='foot'>iii. 22<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>, 25; Hos. v. 15-vi.
3.</note>&mdash;was it when Judah listened to the
<pb n='108'/><anchor id='Pg108'/>
pleadings and warnings of the discovered Book
of the Law and <hi rend='italic'>all the people stood to the Covenant</hi>?
But he does not say whether he found
this sincere or whether it was merely a shallow
stir of the feelings. Probably he suspected the
latter, for in answer to it he gives not God's
gracious acceptance, but a stern call to a deeper
repentance and to a thorough trenching of their
hearts.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Fallow up the fallow-ground,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Sow not on thorns!</l>
<l>To your God<note place='foot'>So Greek.</note> circumcise ye,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Off from your heart with the foreskin!</l>
<l>Lest My wrath break out like the fire,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And burn with none to quench.<note place='foot'>iv. 3,
4.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Jeremiah has been called the blackest of pessimists,
and among his best-known sayings some
seem to justify the charge:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Can the Ethiop change his skin,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Or the leopard his spots?</l>
<l>Then also may ye do good,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Who are wont to do evil.<note place='foot'>xiii. 23.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
And again,
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>False above all is the heart,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And sick to despair,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Who is to know it?</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<pb n='109'/><anchor id='Pg109'/>

<p>
But to his question came the answer:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>I, the Lord, searching the heart,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And trying the reins,</l>
<l>To give to each man as his ways,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>As the fruit of his doings.<note place='foot'>xvii. 9,
10.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
In this answer there is awfulness but not final
doom. The affirmation of a man's dread responsibility
for his fate implies, too, the liberty
to change his ways. In the dim mystery of the
heart freedom is clear. Similarly, and even
more plainly, is this expressed in the earlier
call to <hi rend='italic'>break up the fallow-ground</hi>. This implies
that beneath those surfaces of the national life,
whether of callous indifference on the one hand
or of shallow feeling on the other, there is soil
which, if thoroughly ploughed, will be hospitable
to the good seed and fit to bring forth fruits
meet for repentance. Human nature even at
its worst has tracts other than those on which
there has been careless sowing among thorns,
moral possibilities below those of its abused
or neglected surfaces. Let us mark this depth,
which the Prophet's insight has already reached.
Much will come out of it; this is the matrix
of all developments by himself and others of
the doctrine of man and his possibilities under
God. And for all time the truth is valid that
many spoiled or wasted lives are spoiled or wasted
<pb n='110'/><anchor id='Pg110'/>
only on the surface; and that it is worth while
ploughing deeper for their possibilities.<note place='foot'>See further,
<ref target="Lecture_VIII">Lecture viii</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
In what form the deep ploughing required was
<emph>at first</emph> imagined by the Prophet we see from the
immediately following Oracles.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<head>2. Oracles on the Scythians. (With some others: IV. 5-VI. 29.)</head>

<p>
The invasion of Western Asia by the Scythians
happened some time between 627 and 620
<hi rend='smallcaps'>B.C.</hi><note place='foot'>See above, p.
<ref target="Pg073">73</ref>.</note>
The following series of brief poems unfold the
panic actually caused, or to the Prophet's imagination
likely to be caused, in Judah by the advance
of these marauding hordes, and clearly reflect
their appearance and manner of raiding. It is
indeed doubtful that Judah was visited by the
Scythians, who appear to have swept only the
maritime plain of Palestine. And once more we
must remember that when the Prophet dictated
his early Oracles to Baruch for the second time
in 604, and <hi rend='italic'>added to them many more like
words</hi>,<note place='foot'>xxxvi. 32.</note>
the impending enemy from the North was no
longer the Scythians but Nebuchadrezzar and his
Chaldeans; for this will explain features of the
poems that are not suited to the Scythians and
their peculiar warfare, which avoided the siege
of fortified towns but kept to the open country
<pb n='111'/><anchor id='Pg111'/>
and the ruin of its villages and fields. Jeremiah
does not give the feared invaders a name. The
Scythians were utterly new to his world; yet
their name may have occurred in the poems as
originally delivered and have been removed in
604, when the Scythians were no longer a force
to be reckoned with.<note place='foot'>On the
subject of this paragraph see the appendix on <q>The
Medes and Scythians.</q> The following may be consulted:
N. Schmidt in <q>Enc. Bibl.</q> on <q>Jeremiah</q> and <q>Scythians;</q>
Driver, <q>The Book of the Prophet Jeremiah,</q> p. 21; J. R.
Gillies, <q>Jeremiah, the Man and His Message,</q> pp. 63 ff., who
thinks that the Scythians did invade Judah, and W. R.
Thomson, <q>The Burden of the Lord,</q> pp. 46 ff., who thinks
they did not. A thorough study of the question will be found
in Skinner's <q>Prophecy and Religion, Studies in the Life of
Jeremiah,</q> ch. iii. The case against the Scythians being the
enemy from the North that Jeremiah describes is best presented
by J. F. McCurdy in <q>History, Prophecy, and the Monuments,</q>
vol. ii. pp. 395 ff.</note>
</p>

<p>
1. As it has reached us, the First Scythian
Song, Ch. IV. 5-8, opens with the general
formula&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Proclaim in Judah and Jerusalem,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Make heard and say!</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
which may be the addition of a later hand, but
is as probably Jeremiah's own; for the capital,
though not likely to be besieged by the Scythians,
was just as concerned with their threatened invasion
as the country folk, to whom, in the first
<pb n='112'/><anchor id='Pg112'/>
place, the lines are addressed. The <hi rend='italic'>trump</hi> or
<hi rend='italic'>horn</hi> of the first line was the signal of alarm, kept
ready by the watchman of every village, as Amos
and Joel indicate.<note place='foot'>Amos iii. 6; Joel ii. 1.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Strike up the trump through the land,&nbsp;&nbsp;IV. 5<hi rend='italic'>b</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Call with full voice,</l>
<l>And say, Sweep together and into</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The fortified towns.</l>
<l>Hoist the signal towards Ṣion,&nbsp;&nbsp;6</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Pack off and stay not!</l>
<l>For evil I bring from the North</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And ruin immense.</l>
<l>The Lion is up from his thicket,&nbsp;&nbsp;7</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Mauler of nations;</l>
<l>He is off and forth from his place,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Thy land<note place='foot'>Greek
<hi rend='italic'>the earth</hi>.</note> to lay waste;</l>
<l>That thy townships be burned</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>With none to inhabit!</l>
<l>Gird ye with sackcloth for this,&nbsp;&nbsp;8</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Howl and lament,</l>
<l>For the glow of the wrath of the Lord</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Turns not from us.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
These lines are followed by a verse with an
introduction to itself, and therefore too separate
from the context, and indeed too general to have
belonged to so vivid a song:&mdash;
</p>

<pb n='113'/><anchor id='Pg113'/>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
9. And it shall be in that day&mdash;Rede of the
Lord&mdash;
</p>
<lg>
<l>The heart of the king shall perish,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And the heart of the princes,</l>
<l>And the priests shall be aghast</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And the prophets dismayed!</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
And this is followed by one of the sudden protests
to God, which are characteristic of Jeremiah:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
10. And I said, Ah Lord God, surely Thou hast
wholly deceived this people and Jerusalem
saying, <q>Peace shall be yours,</q> while the
sword strikes through to the life!
</quote>

<p>
2. The Second Scythian Song is like the first,
prefaced by a double address, which there is no
reason to deny to Jeremiah. Jerusalem is named
twice in the song, and naturally, since the whole
land is threatened with waste and the raiders
come up to the suburbs of the capital. The
Prophet speaks, but as so often the Voice of the
Lord breaks through his own and calls directly
to the city and people (though the last line of
verse 12 may be a later addition). On the other
hand, the Prophet melts into his people; their
panic and pangs become his. This is one of the
earliest instances of Jeremiah's bearing of the
sins of his people and of their punishment.
</p>

<pb n='114'/><anchor id='Pg114'/>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
IV. 11.  At that time it was said to this people and
to Jerusalem,
</p>
<lg>
<l>A wind off the blaze of the bare desert heights,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Straight on the Daughter of my people,</l>
<l>Neither to winnow nor to sift,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>In full blast it meets me.&nbsp;&nbsp;12</l>
<l>[Now will I speak My judgments upon them]</l>
<l>Lo, like the clouds he is mounting,&nbsp;&nbsp;13</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Like the whirlwind his cars!</l>
<l>Swifter than vultures his horses,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Woe, we are undone!</l>
<l>Jerusalem, cleanse thou thy heart,<note place='foot'>The text adds
<hi rend='italic'>from evil</hi>, one wonders if <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>
was added in 604; without it the line is regular.</note>&nbsp;&nbsp;14</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>That thou be saved!</l>
<l>How long shalt thou harbour within thee</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Thy guilty devices.</l>
<l>For hark! They signal from Dan,&nbsp;&nbsp;15</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Mount Ephraim echoes disaster.</l>
<l>Warn the folk, <q>They are come!</q><note place='foot'>After the
Greek.</note>&nbsp;&nbsp;16</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Make heard o'er Jerusalem.</l>
<l>Behold,<note place='foot'>So Syr., transferred from previous couplet.</note>
beleaguerers (?) coming</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>From a land far away;</l>
<l>They give out their voice on the townships of Judah;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Like the guards on her fields&nbsp;&nbsp;17</l>
<pb n='115'/><anchor id='Pg115'/>
<l>They are round and upon her,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>For Me she defied!<note place='foot'>Metre and
meaning of 16 and 17 uncertain. For beleaguerers (?) Duhm reads
<hi rend='italic'>panthers</hi> or <hi rend='italic'>leopards</hi>; cp. v. 6.</note></l>
<l>Thy ways and thy deeds have done&nbsp;&nbsp;18</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>These things to thee.</l>
<l>This evil of thine how bitter!</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>It strikes to the heart.</l>
<l>O my bowels! My bowels, I writhe!&nbsp;&nbsp;19</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>O walls of my heart!</l>
<l>My heart is in storm upon me,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>I cannot keep silence.<note place='foot'>Duhm after
Greek renders, My soul is in storm, my heart throbs.</note></l>
<l>For the sound of the trump thou hast heard,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>O my soul,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The uproar of battle.</l>
<l>Ruin upon ruin is summoned,&nbsp;&nbsp;20</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The land is undone!</l>
<l>Suddenly undone my tents,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>In a moment my curtains!</l>
<l>How long must I look for the signal&nbsp;&nbsp;21</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And hark for the sound of the trump!</l>
<l>[Yea, fools are My people&nbsp;&nbsp;22</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Nor Me do they fear.<note place='foot'>Greek;
Hebrew <hi rend='italic'>know</hi>.</note></l>
<l>Children besotted are they,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Void of discretion.</l>
<l>Clever they are to do evil,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>To do good they know not.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<pb n='116'/><anchor id='Pg116'/>

<p>
3. The Third of the Scythian Songs is without
introduction. Whether the waste, darkness, earthquake
and emptiness described are imminent
or have happened is still left uncertain, as in the
previous songs. The Prophet speaks, but as before
the Voice of God peals out at the end.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>I looked to the earth, and lo chaos,&nbsp;&nbsp;23</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>To the heavens, their light was gone.</l>
<l>I looked to the hills and<note place='foot'>Greek; Hebrew adds
<hi rend='italic'>lo!</hi></note> they quivered,&nbsp;&nbsp;24</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>All the heights were a-shuddering.</l>
<l>I looked&mdash;and behold not a man!&nbsp;&nbsp;25</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>All the birds of heaven were fled.</l>
<l>I looked to the gardens, lo desert,&nbsp;&nbsp;26</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>All the townships destroyed,</l>
<l>Before the face of the Lord,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The glow of His wrath.</l>
<l>[For thus hath the Lord said,&nbsp;&nbsp;27</l>
<l>All the land shall be waste</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Yet full end I make not]<note place='foot'>Probably
a later addition.</note></l>
<l>For this let the Earth lament,&nbsp;&nbsp;28</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And black be Heaven above!</l>
<l>I have spoken and will not relent,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Purposed and turn not from it.<note place='foot'>The
order of verbs in this couplet is that of the Greek.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
4. The Fourth Scythian Song follows immediately,
also without introduction. The first four
couplets vividly describe the flight of the peasantry,
<pb n='117'/><anchor id='Pg117'/>
actual or imagined, before the invaders. The rest
seems addressed to the City as though being
threatened she sought to reduce her foes with a
woman's wiles, only to find that it was not her
love but her life they were after, and so expired
at their hands in despair. All this is more suitable
to the Chaldean than to the Scythian invasion,
and may be one of the Prophet's additions in 604
to his earlier Oracles. However we take it, the
figure is of Jeremiah's boldest and most vivid.
The irony is keen.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>From the noise of the horse and the bowmen,&nbsp;&nbsp;IV. 29</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>All the land<note place='foot'>So Greek; Hebrew
<hi rend='italic'>city</hi>, a change possibly made after the
fall of Jerusalem.</note> is in flight,</l>
<l>They are into the caves, huddle in thickets,<note place='foot'>So Greek.</note></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Are up on the crags.</l>
<l>Every town of its folk is forsaken</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>No habitant in it.</l>
<l>All is up! Thou destined to ruin(?)<note place='foot'>Text uncertain; this reading
is derived by differently dividing the consonants&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>bah
no' ash for bahen 'îsh</hi>.</note>&nbsp;&nbsp;30</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>What doest thou now?</l>
<l>That thou dressest in scarlet,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And deck'st thee in deckings of gold,</l>
<l>With stibium widenest thine eyes.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>In vain dost thou prink!</l>
<pb n='118'/><anchor id='Pg118'/>
<l>Though satyrs they utterly loathe thee,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Thy life are they after!</l>
<l>For voice as of travail I hear,&nbsp;&nbsp;31</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Anguish as hers that beareth,</l>
<l>The voice of the daughter of Ṣion agasp,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>he spreadeth her hands:</l>
<l><q rend='pre'>Woe unto me, but it faints,</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='post'>My life to the butchers!</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
The next poem, Ch. V. 1-13, says little of the
Scythians, possibly only in verse 6, but details the
moral reasons for the doom with which they
threatened the people. It describes the Prophet's
search through Jerusalem for an honest, God-fearing
man and his failure to find one. Hence
the fresh utterance of judgment. Perjury and
whoredom are rife, with a callousness to chastisement
already inflicted. Some have relegated
Jeremiah's visit to the capital to a year after 621-20
when the deuteronomic reforms had begun
and Josiah had removed the rural priests to the
Temple.<note place='foot'>P. <ref target="Pg134">134</ref>.</note>
But, as we have seen, Anathoth lay so
near to Jerusalem, and intercourse between them
was naturally so constant, that Jeremiah may well
have gained the following experience before he
left his village for residence in the city. The
position of the poem among the Scythian Songs,
along with the possible allusion to the Scythians
<pb n='119'/><anchor id='Pg119'/>
in verse 6, suggests a date before 620. There is
no introduction.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Range ye the streets of Jerusalem,&nbsp;&nbsp;V. 1</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Look now and know,</l>
<l>And search her broad places,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>If a man ye can find&mdash;</l>
<l>If there be that does justice,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Aiming at honesty.</l>
<l>[That I may forgive them<note place='foot'>Greek; Hebrew
<hi rend='italic'>her</hi>. The clause seems an addition.</note>]</l>
<l>Though they say, <q>As God liveth,</q>&nbsp;&nbsp;2</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Falsely<note place='foot'>Hebrew adds
<hi rend='italic'>therefore</hi>.</note> they swear</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Lord</hi>, are Thine eyes upon lies(?)&nbsp;&nbsp;3</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And not on the truth<note place='foot'>So Duhm after
the Greek; p. 48, n. 2.</note>?</l>
<l>Thou hast smitten, they ail not,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Consumed them, they take not correction.</l>
<l>Their faces set harder than rock,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>They refuse to return.</l>
<l>But I said, <q rend='pre'>Ah, they are the poor,</q>&nbsp;&nbsp;4</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And therefore<note place='foot'>So Greek.</note> the
foolish!</l>
<l><q rend='pre'>They know not the Way of the Lord,</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The Rule of their God.</l>
<l><q rend='pre'>To the great I will get me,</q>&nbsp;&nbsp;5</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>With them let me speak.</l>
<l><q rend='pre'>For they know the Way of the Lord,</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='post'>And the Rule of their God.</q></l>
<l>Ah, together they have broken the yoke,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>They have burst the bonds!</l>
<pb n='120'/><anchor id='Pg120'/>
<l>So a lion from the jungle shall smite them,&nbsp;&nbsp;6</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>A wolf of the waste destroy,</l>
<l>The leopard shall prowl round their towns,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>All faring forth shall be torn.</l>
<l>For many have been their rebellions,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Profuse their backslidings.</l>
<l>How shall I pardon thee this&mdash;&nbsp;&nbsp;7</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Thy children have left Me,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And swear by no-gods.</l>
<l>I gave them their fill and they whored,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And trooped to the house of the harlot.</l>
<l>Rampant<note place='foot'>The text is uncertain, the Hebrew margin and versions
pointing to an untranslatable original.</note> stallions they be,&nbsp;&nbsp;8</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Neighing each for the wife of his friend.</l>
<l>Shall I not visit on such,&nbsp;&nbsp;9</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Rede of the Lord,</l>
<l>Nor on a people like this</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Myself take vengeance?</l>
</lg>
<lg>
<l>Up to her vine-rows, destroy,&nbsp;&nbsp;10</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And make<note place='foot'>The text has
<hi rend='italic'>make not</hi>, but this is inconsistent with the context,
and <hi rend='italic'>not</hi> seems a later addition.</note> a full end,</l>
<l>Away with her branches,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>They are not the Lord's.</l>
<l>For betraying they have betrayed Me&nbsp;&nbsp;11</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Judah and Israel both [Rede of the Lord]</l>
<l>The Lord they have belied,&nbsp;&nbsp;12</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Saying <q rend='pre'>Not He!</q></l>
<pb n='121'/><anchor id='Pg121'/>
<l>Evil shall never come on us,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Nor famine nor sword shall we see.</l>
<l><q rend='pre'>The prophets! they are nothing but wind</q>&nbsp;&nbsp;13</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='post'>The Word is not with
them!</q><note place='foot'>Hebrew adds, <hi rend='italic'>thus be it done
them</hi>; Greek omits.</note></l>
</lg>
<p>
14. Therefore thus hath the Lord of Hosts said,
because of their speaking this word&mdash;<note place='foot'>Hebrew has
<hi rend='italic'>God</hi> after <hi rend='italic'>Lord</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>your</hi> for <hi rend='italic'>their</hi>.</note>
</p>
<lg>
<l>Behold I am setting My Word</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>In thy mouth for fire,</l>
<l>And this people for wood,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And it shall devour them.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
5. The Fifth Song upon the Scythians, Ch. V.
15-17, besides still leaving them nameless,
emphasises their strangeness to Israel's world.
There was a common language in Western Asia,
Aramean, the <hi rend='italic'>lingua franca</hi> of traders from Nineveh
to Memphis; and Jew, Assyrian and Egyptian conversed
in it. But the tongue of these raiders from
over the Caucasus was unintelligible. Yet how
they would set their teeth into the land! Mixed
with the verses which thus describe them are
others which suit not them but the Chaldeans and
must have been added by the Prophet in 604.
A people so new to the Jews might hardly have
been called by Jeremiah <hi rend='italic'>an ancient nation, from of old
a nation</hi>, and in fact these phrases are wanting in
the Greek version.
</p>

<pb n='122'/><anchor id='Pg122'/>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Behold, I am bringing upon you&nbsp;&nbsp;V. 15</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>A nation from far,</l>
<l>[O house of Israel, Rede of the Lord</l>
<l>An ancient nation it is,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>From of old a nation.]<note place='foot'>This
couplet the Greek lacks.</note></l>
<l>A nation thou knowest not its tongue,&nbsp;&nbsp;16</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Nor canst hear what it says,</l>
<l>Its quiver an open grave,<note place='foot'>Eloquent of death: Ps. v. 9.</note></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>All of it stalwarts.<note place='foot'>For these four
lines the Greek has only <hi rend='italic'>A nation thou
hearest not its tongue, all of them mighty</hi>.</note></l>
<l>It shall eat up thy harvest and bread,&nbsp;&nbsp;17</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Eat thy sons and thy daughters,</l>
<l>It shall eat up thy flocks and thy cattle,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Eat thy vines and thy figs.</l>
<l>It shall beat down thy fortified towns,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Wherein thou dost trust, with the sword.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
The last couplet is unsuitable to the Scythians,
incapable as they were of sieges and avoiding
fortified towns&mdash;though once they rushed
Askalon. It is probably, therefore, another of
the additions of 604 referring to the Chaldeans.
The prose which follows is certainly from the
Chaldean period, for it was not Scythians but
Chaldeans who threatened with exile the peoples
whom they overran.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
V. 18. Yet even in those days&mdash;Rede of the
Lord&mdash;I will not make a full end of you.
<pb n='123'/><anchor id='Pg123'/>
19. And it shall be when they say, For what
hath the Lord our God done to us all these
things?&mdash;that thou shalt say to them, Just as
ye have left Me and have served foreign gods
in your own land, so shall ye serve strangers
in a land not yours.
</quote>

<p>
There follows a poem, verses 20-31, that has
nothing to do with the Scythian series; and that
with the preceding prose, with which also it has no
connection, shows us what a conglomeration of
Oracles the Book of Jeremiah is. It seems as
though the compiler, searching for a place for it,
had seen the catch-word <hi rend='italic'>harvest</hi> in the previous
Scythian song and, this one having the same word,
he had copied it in here. The Book shows signs
elsewhere of the same mechanical method. But
like all the Oracles this has for its theme the
foolish dulness of Israel to their God and His
Word, and the truth that it is their crimes which
are the cause of all their afflictions yet now not in
history but in Nature. There is no reason to doubt
that the verses are Jeremiah's, and nothing against
our dating them in the early years of his ministry.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Declare ye this in the House of Jacob,&nbsp;&nbsp;V. 20</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Through Judah let it be heard:<note place='foot'>Hebrew
adds <hi rend='italic'>saying</hi>.</note></l>
<l>Hear ye now this, people most foolish,&nbsp;&nbsp;21</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And void of sense.<note place='foot'>Lit.
<hi rend='italic'>with no heart</hi>, the seat not only of feeling, but of the
practical intelligence.</note></l>
<pb n='124'/><anchor id='Pg124'/>
<l>[They have eyes but they do not see,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Ears but they hear not.]</l>
<l>Fear ye not Me, Rede of the Lord,&nbsp;&nbsp;22</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Nor tremble before Me?&mdash;</l>
<l>Who have set the sand a bound for the sea,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>An eternal decree it cannot transgress;</l>
<l>Though (its waters)<note place='foot'>Something like this has obviously
slipped from the text.</note> toss, they shall not prevail,</l>
<l>And its rollers boom, they cannot break over.</l>
<l>Yet this people heart-hard and rebellious,&nbsp;&nbsp;23</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Have swerved and gone off;</l>
<l>For not with their hearts do they say,&nbsp;&nbsp;24</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='pre'>Now fear we the Lord our God,</q></l>
<l><q rend='pre'>Who giveth the rain in its season,</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The early and latter;</l>
<l><q rend='pre'>And the weeks appointed for harvest</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='post'>Secureth for us.</q></l>
<l>These have your crimes deranged,&nbsp;&nbsp;25</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Your sins withholden your luck.</l>
<l>For scoundrels are found in My folk,&nbsp;&nbsp;26</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Who prowl with the crouch of a
fowler(?)<note place='foot'>Text uncertain.</note></l>
<l>And set their traps to destroy,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>'Tis men they would catch!</l>
<l>Like a cage that is full of birds,&nbsp;&nbsp;27</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their houses are filled with deceit,<note place='foot'>Either
with the spoils or with the victims thereof.</note></l>
<l>And so they wax wealthy and great&mdash;&nbsp;&nbsp;28</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>They are fat, they are sleek!&mdash;</l>
<pb n='125'/><anchor id='Pg125'/>
<l>Overflowing with things of evil(?),</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>They defend not the right,</l>
<l>The right of the orphan to prosper,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Nor justice judge for the needy.<note place='foot'>The
text of the whole verse is uncertain. Greek omits <hi rend='italic'>things
of evil</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>to prosper</hi>.</note></l>
<l>Shall I not visit on these,&nbsp;&nbsp;29</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Rede of the Lord,</l>
<l>Nor on a people like this</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Myself be avenged?<note place='foot'>Or
<hi rend='italic'>take vengeance Myself</hi>.</note></l>
<l>Appalling and ghastly it is&nbsp;&nbsp;30</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>That has come to pass in the land:</l>
<l>The prophets prophesy lies,&nbsp;&nbsp;31</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The priests bear rule at their hand,</l>
<l>And My people&mdash;they love so to have it;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>But what will ye do in the end?</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
6. In the Sixth Song on the Scythians, VI. 1-5,
which also is given without introduction, Jerusalem
is threatened&mdash;even Jerusalem to which in
the previous songs the country-folk had been
bidden to fly for shelter&mdash;and the foes are described
in the attempt to rush her, as they rushed Askalon
according to Herodotus. That they are represented
as faltering and no success is predicted for
them, and also that they are called <hi rend='italic'>shepherds</hi>, are
signs that it is the Scythians, though still nameless,
who are meant in verses 3-5. The next
three verses, separately introduced, point rather to
<pb n='126'/><anchor id='Pg126'/>
a Chaldean invasion by their picture of besiegers
throwing up a mound against the walls, and may
therefore be one of the additions to his earlier
Oracles made by the Prophet, when in 604 the
enemy from the North was clearly seen to be
Nebuchadrezzar, with the siege-trains familiar
to us from the Assyrian and Babylonian monuments;
upon which are represented just such a
hewing of timber and heaping of mounds against
a city's walls.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Pack off, O Benjamin's sons,&nbsp;&nbsp;VI. 1</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Out of Jerusalem!</l>
<l>Strike up the trump in Tekoa,<note place='foot'>Hebrew bitĕkô'a tiḳĕ'û;
a play upon words.</note></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>O'er Beth-hakkérem lift up the signal!</l>
<l>For evil glowers out of the North,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And ruin immense.</l>
<l>O the charming (?) the pampered height<note place='foot'>After the Greek;
the Hebrew text is corrupt.</note>&nbsp;&nbsp;2</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Of the daughter of Ṣion!</l>
<l>Unto her shepherds are coming,&nbsp;&nbsp;3</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>With their flocks around,<note place='foot'>Transferred
from the next line to suit the metre.</note></l>
<l>They pitch against her their tents,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Each crops at his hand.</l>
<l><q rend='pre'>Hallow<note place='foot'>The Hebrew idiom for starting a campaign
or a siege, which
was formally sanctioned by a religious rite.</note> the battle against her,</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='post'>Up, let us on by noon.</q></l>
<pb n='127'/><anchor id='Pg127'/>
<l><q rend='pre'>Woe unto us! The day is turning,</q>&nbsp;&nbsp;4</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='post'>The shadows of evening stretch.</q></l>
<l><q rend='pre'>Up then and on by night,</q>&nbsp;&nbsp;5</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='post'>That we ruin her palaces!</q></l>
<l>For thus said the Lord of Hosts:&nbsp;&nbsp;6</l>
<l>Hew down her<note place='foot'>So some MSS.</note> trees and heap</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Against Jerusalem a mound;</l>
<l>Woe to the City of Falsehood,<note place='foot'>So Greek: Hebrew,
<hi rend='italic'>She is a city to be visited</hi>.</note></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Nought but oppression within her!</l>
<l>As a well keeps its waters fresh&nbsp;&nbsp;7</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>She keeps fresh her evil;</l>
<l>Violence and spoil are heard throughout her,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Ever before Me sickness and wounds.</l>
<l>Jerusalem, be thou corrected,&nbsp;&nbsp;8</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Lest from thee My soul doth break,</l>
<l>Lest I lay thee a desolate waste,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Uninhabited land.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Here follows another and separately introduced
Oracle:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Thus hath the Lord<note place='foot'>Hebrew adds <hi rend='italic'>of
Hosts</hi>.</note> said:&nbsp;&nbsp;9</l>
<l>Glean, let them glean as a vine</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Israel's remnant;</l>
<l>Like the grape-gleaner turn thy hand</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Again to its<note place='foot'>So Greek.</note> tendrils.</l>
<l><q rend='pre'>To whom shall I utter myself,</q>&nbsp;&nbsp;10</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And witness that they may hear?</l>
<pb n='128'/><anchor id='Pg128'/>
<l><q rend='pre'>Lo, uncircumcised is their ear,</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>They cannot give heed.</l>
<l><q rend='pre'>The Word of the Lord is their scorn,</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>No pleasure have they therein.</l>
<l><q rend='pre'>I am full of the rage of the Lord,</q>&nbsp;&nbsp;11</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='pre'>Weary with holding it back!</q></l>
<l>Pour<note place='foot'>It is difficult to discriminate in these lines between
the Lord and the Prophet as speakers. If the Greek <hi rend='italic'>I will pour</hi>
is correct, the Prophet still speaks, otherwise the Lord who began in verse
9 and was followed by the Prophet in 10 and 11<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>,
resumes in 11<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>.</note> it out on the child in the street,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On the youths where they gather;</l>
<l>Both husband and wife shall be taken,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The old with the full of days.</l>
<l>Their homes shall be turned to others,&nbsp;&nbsp;12</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their fields and wives together,</l>
<l>When I stretch forth My Hand</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On those that dwell in this<note place='foot'>So
Greek.</note> land.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>[Rede of the Lord.]</l>
<l>Because from the least to the greatest&nbsp;&nbsp;13</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>All are greedy of gain,</l>
<l>Right on from prophet to priest</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Every one worketh lies.</l>
<l>They would heal the breach of My people,&nbsp;&nbsp;14</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>As though it were trifling,</l>
<l>Saying, <q>It is well, it is well</q>&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>When&mdash;where<note place='foot'><hi
rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi></note> is it well?</l>
<l>Were they shamed of their loathsome deeds?&nbsp;&nbsp;15</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Nay, not at all ashamed!</l>
<pb n='129'/><anchor id='Pg129'/>
<l>They know not even to blush!</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>So they with the fallen shall fall,</l>
<l>And shall reel in the time that I visit,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Rede of the Lord.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Still another Oracle which gives no glimpse of
the Scythians, but threatens a vague disaster and
once more states the moral reasons for Judah's
doom. Its allusion to incense and sacrifices is
no reason for dating it after the discovery of
Deuteronomy.<note place='foot'>Hans Schmidt, quoted by Dr. Skinner, does so, and
takes it as the earliest evidence of Jeremiah's opposition to Deuteronomy,
and Dr. Skinner in his Chapter <q>In the Wake of the Reform,</q>
says it is almost certainly post-deuteronomic. I am not convinced.
See below, p. <ref target="Pg133">133</ref>.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Thus hath the Lord said&mdash;&nbsp;&nbsp;16</l>
<l>Halt on the ways and look,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And ask for the ancient paths:</l>
<l>Where is<note place='foot'>Greek <hi rend='italic'>mark ye</hi>.</note>
the way that is good?</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Go ye in that,</l>
<l>And rest shall ye find to your soul,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>But they&mdash;<q>We go not!</q></l>
<l>I raised up sentinels for you&mdash;&nbsp;&nbsp;17</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Heed the sound of the trump!<note place='foot'>See above, p.
<ref target="Pg112">112</ref>.</note></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>But they&mdash;<q>We heed not!</q></l>
<l>Therefore, O nations, hearken,&nbsp;&nbsp;18</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And own My record against them (?)<note place='foot'>Text
both of Greek and Hebrew uncertain; the above is
adapted from the Greek.</note></l>
<pb n='130'/><anchor id='Pg130'/>
<l>Hear thou, O Earth,&nbsp;&nbsp;19</l>
<l>Lo, evil I bring to this people,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The fruit of their own devices,<note place='foot'>Greek
has <hi rend='italic'>backslidings</hi>.</note></l>
<l>Since they have not heeded My Word,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And My Law have despised.</l>
<l>To Me what is incense that cometh from Sheba,&nbsp;&nbsp;20</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Sweet-cane from a far-off land?</l>
<l>Your holocausts are not acceptable,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Nor your sacrifice pleasing.</l>
<l>Therefore thus hath the Lord said:&nbsp;&nbsp;21</l>
<l>Behold I set for this people</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Blocks upon which to stumble;</l>
<l>Fathers and children together,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Neighbour and friend shall perish.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
None of the foregoing brief and separate Oracles
diverts from the moral theme of all these earlier
utterances of the Prophet, that Judah's afflictions,
whether from Nature or from invaders, are due to
her own wickedness. And this record even the
foreign peoples are called to witness&mdash;another
proof that from the first Jeremiah had a sense of
a mission to <emph>the nations</emph> as well as to his own
countrymen.
</p>

<p>
7. There follows the Seventh, the last of the
Songs which may be referred to the Scythian
invasion, Ch. VI. 22-26. It repeats the distance
from which, in the fateful North, those hordes
have been <hi rend='italic'>stirred</hi> to their work of judgment, their
<pb n='131'/><anchor id='Pg131'/>
ruthlessness and terrific tumult, the panic they
produce, and bitter mourning. The usual formula
introduces the verses.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
22. Thus hath the Lord said:
</p>
<lg>
<l>Lo, a people comes out of the North,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>A nation<note place='foot'>Hebrew adds
<hi rend='italic'>great</hi>, which Greek omits.</note>
astir from the ends of the earth,</l>
<l>The bow and the javelin they grasp,&nbsp;&nbsp;23</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Cruel and ruthless,</l>
<l>The noise of them booms like the sea,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On horses they ride&mdash;</l>
<l>Arrayed as one man for the battle</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On thee, O Daughter of Ṣion!</l>
<l>We have heard their fame,&nbsp;&nbsp;24</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Limp are our hands;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Anguish hath gripped us,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Pangs as of travail.</l>
<l>Fare not forth to the field,&nbsp;&nbsp;25</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Nor walk on the way,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>For the sword of a foe,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Terror all round!</l>
<l>Daughter of My people, gird on thee sackcloth&nbsp;&nbsp;26</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And wallow in ashes!</l>
<l>Mourn as for an only-begotten,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Wail of the bitterest!</l>
<l>For of a sudden there cometh</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The spoiler upon us.<note place='foot'>Greek
<hi rend='italic'>you</hi>.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<pb n='132'/><anchor id='Pg132'/>

<p>
This is the last of Jeremiah's Oracles on the
Scythians. There is little or no doubt of their
date&mdash;before 621-20. What knowledge of this
new people and their warfare the Prophet displays!
What conscience of the ethical purpose
of the Lord of Hosts in threatening Judah with
them! Yet some still refuse to credit the story
of his Call, that from the first he heard himself
appointed as a prophet <hi rend='italic'>to the nations</hi>.<note place='foot'>See
above, pp. <ref target="Pg079">79</ref> ff.</note>
</p>

<p>
This section of Jeremiah's earlier Oracles concludes
with one addressed to himself, Ch. VI. 27-30.
It describes the task assigned him during
the most of his time under Josiah, whether before
the discovery and promulgation of the Book of the
Law in 621-20, or subsequently to this while he
watched the nation's new endeavour to repent
and reform. During the years from 621-20 till
608 when Josiah was defeated and slain at
Megiddo, there can have been but little for him
to do except to follow, as his searching eyes and
detached mind alone in Israel could follow, the
great venture of Judah in obedience to the Book
of the Law. For this interval the outside
world had ceased to threaten Israel. The Assyrian
control of her was relaxed: the people
of God were free, and had their first opportunity
for over a century to work out their own
salvation.
</p>

<pb n='133'/><anchor id='Pg133'/>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Assayer among My people I set thee,<note place='foot'>Hebrew adds,
<hi rend='italic'>a fortress</hi>, obviously borrowed by some scribe
from other appointments by God of Jeremiah, e.g. i. 18. For
<hi rend='italic'>ways</hi> in next line Duhm by change of a letter reads
<hi rend='italic'>value</hi>.</note>&nbsp;&nbsp;27</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>To know and assay their ways,</l>
<l>All of them utterly recreant,&nbsp;&nbsp;28</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Gadding about to slander.</l>
<l>Brass and iron are all of them(?),</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Wasters they be!</l>
<l>Fiercely blow the bellows,&nbsp;&nbsp;29</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The lead is consumed of the fire(?)</l>
<l>In vain does the smelter smelt,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their dross<note place='foot'>Greek and Targ. read
<hi rend='italic'>their evil</hi> for <hi rend='italic'>the evil ones</hi> of the
Hebrew.</note> is not drawn.</l>
<l><q>Refuse silver</q> men call them,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>For the Lord hath refused them.<note place='foot'>The
general meaning is clear, the details obscure for the text
is uncertain. Driver's note is the most instructive. In refining,
the silver was mixed with lead and the mass, fused in the furnace,
had a current of air turned upon it; the lead oxidising acted as
a flux, carrying off the alloy or dross. But in Israel's case the
dross is too closely mixed with the silver, so that though the
bellows blow and the lead is oxidised, the dross is not drawn and
the silver remains impure.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
To take these lines as subsequent to the
institution of Deuteronomy and expressive of
the judgment of the Prophet upon the failure of
the reformation under Josiah to reach the depth
of a real repentance,<note place='foot'>As Erbt (<q>Jeremia u. seine Zeit</q>) and
Skinner (p. 160) do.</note> is unnecessary. The young
<pb n='134'/><anchor id='Pg134'/>
Jeremiah had already tested his people and in his
earliest Oracles reached conclusions as hopeless
as that here. At least he had already been called
to test the people; and in next section we shall
see how he continued to fulfil his duty after the
discovery of Deuteronomy, and onwards through
the attempts at reformation which it inspired.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<head>3. Jeremiah and Deuteronomy. (Chs. VII, VIII. 8, XI.)</head>

<p>
We are not told when or why Jeremiah left
Anathoth for Jerusalem. His early poem denouncing
the citizens<note place='foot'>v. 1-8, see p. <ref target="Pg119">119</ref>.</note>
reveals a close observation
of their morals but no trace of the reforms begun
by Josiah soon after 621 <hi rend='smallcaps'>B.C.</hi> Some therefore hold
that he had settled in the City before that year.<note place='foot'>So Duhm.</note>
Anathoth, however, lay so near Jerusalem that
even from his boyhood Jeremiah must have been
familiar with the life and trade of the capital; and
as his name is not mentioned in connection with
the discovery of the Law-Book on which the
reforms were based, and neither he nor his biographer
speaks of that discovery, it is probable
that as yet he had not entered upon residence in
the Temple-precincts. A natural occasion for the
migration of his family and himself would be upon
Josiah's disestablishment of the rural sanctuaries
and provision for their priests beside the priests
<pb n='135'/><anchor id='Pg135'/>
of the Temple.<note place='foot'>Deut. xviii. 6, II
Kings xxiii. 8, 9.</note> In any case we find Jeremiah
henceforth in Jerusalem, delivering his Words in
the gateways or courts of the Temple to all classes
of the citizens as well as to the country-folk, who
under the new laws of worship thronged more
than ever the City and her great Shrine.
</p>

<p>
There is general agreement that <hi rend='italic'>the Book of the
Law</hi> discovered by the Temple-priests in 621-20
was our Book of Deuteronomy in whole or in
part&mdash;more probably in part, for Deuteronomy
has been compiled from at least two editions of
the same original, and the compilation may not
have been made till some time later. Many of its
laws, including some peculiar to itself, have been
woven out of more than one form, and there are
two Introductions to the Book, each hortatory
and historical and each covering to some extent
the same ground as the other. We cannot tell
how much of this compilation was contained in
the discovered Book of the Law. But this Book
included certainly <emph>first</emph> the laws of worship peculiar
to Deuteronomy, because the reforms which it
inspired carried out these laws, and probably
<emph>second</emph> some of the denunciations which precede or
follow the laws, for such would explain the consternation
of the King when the Book was read
to him.<note place='foot'>On this and the following paragraphs see the writer's
<q>Deuteronomy</q> in the Cambridge Bible for Schools.</note>
</p>

<pb n='136'/><anchor id='Pg136'/>

<p>
Deuteronomy is fairly described as a fresh
codification of the ancient laws of Israel in the
spirit of the Prophets of the Eighth Century.
The Book is not only Law but Prophecy, in the
proper sense of this word, and a prophetic interpretation
of Israel's history. It not only restates
old and adds new laws but enforces the basal
truths of the prophets, and in this enforcement
breathes the ethical fervour of Amos and Isaiah
as well as Hosea's tenderness and his zeal for
education.
</p>

<p>
Deuteronomy has three cardinal doctrines: The
One God, The One Altar, and The One People.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>First</hi>, The One God. Though slightly tinged
with popular conceptions of the existence of other
gods,<note place='foot'>Deut. iv. 19.</note>
the monotheism of the Book is strenuously
moral and warmly spiritual. The God of Israel
is to be served and loved because He is Love&mdash;the
One and Only God not more by His Righteousness
and His Power than by His Grace, manifest
as all three have been throughout His dealings
with Israel. The worship of other gods is forbidden
and so is every attempt to represent Himself
in a material form. His ritual is purged of
foolish, unclean and cruel elements. Witchcraft
and necromancy are utterly condemned.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Second</hi>&mdash;and this is original to Deuteronomy&mdash;The
One Altar, at that time an inevitable corollary
<pb n='137'/><anchor id='Pg137'/>
both to the need for purity in the worship of
God and to the truth of His Unity. The long
license of sacrifices at a multitude of shrines
had resulted not only in the debasement of His
worship, but in the popular confusion of Himself
with a number of local deities.<note place='foot'>See above, pp.
<ref target="Pg076">76</ref>, <ref target="Pg104">104</ref> ff.</note> The removal of
the high-places, the concentration of sacrifice
upon One Altar had, by the bitter experience of
centuries, become a religious and an ethical
necessity.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Third</hi>, The One People. Save for possible
proselytes from the neighbouring heathen, Israel
is alone legislated for&mdash;a free nation owning no
foreign king as it bows to no foreign deity, but
governing itself in obedience to the revealed Will
of its own God. This Will is applied to every
detail of its life in as comprehensive a system of
national religion as the world has known. And
thus next to devotion to the Deity comes pride
in the nation. Because of their possession of the
Divine Law Israel are <emph>the</emph> righteous people and
wise above all others. The patriotism of the
Book must have been one cause of its immediate
acceptance by the people, when Josiah brought
it before them and upon it they made Covenant
with their God. Throughout the Book treats the
nation as a moral unit. It enforces indeed justice
as between man and man. It gives woman a
<pb n='138'/><anchor id='Pg138'/>
higher position than is assumed for her by other
Hebrew codes. It cares for the individual poor,
stranger, debtor and dependent priest with a
humanity all its own, and it exhorts to the
education of children. Above all it forbids base
thoughts as well as base deeds. Yet, while thus
enforcing the elements of a searching personal
morality, Deuteronomy deals with the individual
only through his relations to the nation and the
national worship. The Book has no promise for
the individual beyond the grave. Nor is there
pity nor charity for other peoples nor any sense
of a place for them in the Divine Providence.
There is no missionary spirit nor hope for mankind
outside of Israel.
</p>

<p>
Further it is due to the almost exclusively
national outlook and interest of the Book that it
has no guidance or comfort to offer for another
element of personal experience&mdash;question and
doubt. While it illustrates from the nation's
history the purifying discipline of suffering because
of sin it says nothing of the sufferings of
righteous individuals, but by the absoluteness of
its doctrines of morality and Providence suggests,
if indeed it does not inculcate, the dogma that
right-doing will always meet with prosperity and
wrong-doing with pain and disaster&mdash;a dogma
which provoked the thoughtful to scepticism, as
we shall see with Jeremiah himself.
</p>

<p>
Again, the fact that the Book, while superbly
<pb n='139'/><anchor id='Pg139'/>
insistent upon justice, holiness and humanity,
lays equal emphasis on a definite ritual, with One
Altar and an exclusive system of sacrifices, tempted
the popular mind to a superstitious confidence in
these institutions. And while it was of practical
advantage to have the principles of the prophets
reduced to a written system, which could be
enforced as public law and taught to the young&mdash;two
ends on which the authors of Deuteronomy
are earnestly bent&mdash;there was danger of the people
coming thereby to trust rather in the letter than
in the spirit of the new revelation. Both these
dangers were soon realised. As Dr. A. B.
Davidson has said, <q>Pharisæism and Deuteronomy
came into the world on the same day.</q>
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='stars: 5'/>

<p>
Such was the Book discovered in the Temple
in 621-20 and accepted as Divine by King and
Nation. Modern efforts to connect Jeremiah with
its discovery and introduction to the Monarch,
and even with its composition, may be ignored.
Had there been a particle of evidence for this, it
would have been seized and magnified by the
legalists in Israel, not to speak of those apocryphal
writers who foist so much else on Jeremiah and
Baruch.<note place='foot'>See p. <ref target="Pg008">8</ref>.</note>
That they have not even attempted
this is proof&mdash;if proof were needed&mdash;that Jeremiah,
the youthful son of a rural family, and probably
<pb n='140'/><anchor id='Pg140'/>
still unknown to the authorities in the Capital,
had nothing whatever to do either with the origins,
or with the discovery, of the Book of the Law or
with its presentation to the King by the priests of
the Temple.
</p>

<p>
Yet so great a discovery, so full a volume of
truth poured forth in a style so original and
compelling, cannot have left unmoved a young
prophet of the conscience and heart of Jeremiah.<note place='foot'>Cp. Thomson,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi>, p. 61.</note>
That he was in sympathy with the temper and
the general truths of Deuteronomy we need not
doubt. As for its ethics, its authors were of the
same school as himself and among their teachers
they had the same favourite, Hosea. In his
earliest Oracles Jeremiah had expressed the same
view as theirs of God's constant and clear guidance
of Israel and of the nation's obstinacy in relapsing
from this. His heart, too, must have hailed the
Book's august enforcement of that abolition of
the high places and their pagan ritual, which he
had ventured to urge from his obscure position
in Anathoth. Nor did he ever throughout his
ministry protest against the substitute which the
Book prescribed for those&mdash;the concentration of
the national worship upon a single sanctuary.
On the contrary in a later Oracle he looks
for the day when that shall be observed by all
Israel and the watchmen on Mount Ephraim shall
cry,
</p>

<pb n='141'/><anchor id='Pg141'/>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Rise, let us up to Ṣion,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>To the Lord our God!<note place='foot'>xxxi. 6.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
On the other hand, the emphasis which Deuteronomy
equally lays upon ethics and upon ritual,
and its absolute doctrines of morality and
Providence were bound to provoke questions in
a mind so restlessly questioning as his. Then
there was the movement of reform which followed
upon the appeal of the Book to the whole nation.
Jeremiah himself had called for a national repentance
and here, in the people's acceptance of the
Covenant and consent to the reforms it demanded,
were the signs of such a repentance. No opposition
appears to have been offered to those
reforms. The King who led them was sincere;
a better monarch Judah never knew, and his
reign was signalised by Jeremiah at its close as a
reign of justice when <hi rend='italic'>all was well</hi>. Yet can we
doubt that the Prophet, who had already preached
so rigorous a repentance and had heard himself
appointed by God as the tester of His people,
would use that detached position jealously to
watch the progress of the reforms which the
nation had so hurriedly acclaimed and to test
their moral value?
</p>

<p>
In modern opinion of Jeremiah's attitude to the
discovered Law-Book there are two extremes.
One is of those who regard him as a legalist and
<pb n='142'/><anchor id='Pg142'/>
throughout his career the strenuous advocate of
the Book and the system it enforced. The other
is of those who maintain that he had no sympathy
with legal systems or official reforms, and that
the passages in the Book of Jeremiah which allege
his assent to, and his proclamation of, the Deuteronomic
Covenant, or represent him as using the
language of Deuteronomy, are not worthy of
credit.<note place='foot'>These two extremes are represented by Winckler and Duhm
respectively.</note> Of these extremes we may say at once
that if with both we neglect the twofold character
of Deuteronomy&mdash;its emphasis now on ethics and
now on ritual&mdash;and again, if with both we
assume that Jeremiah's attitude to the Law-Book
and to the reforms it inspired never changed,
then the evidences for that attitude offered by the
Book of Jeremiah are inconsistent and we may
despair of a conclusion. But a more reasonable
course is open to us. If we keep in mind the two
faces of Deuteronomy as well as the doubtful
progress for many years of the reforms started
by it, and if we also remember that a prophet
like all the works of God was subject to growth;
if we allow to Jeremiah the same freedom to
change his purpose in face of fresh developments
of his people's character as in the Parable of the
Potter he imputes to his God; if we recall how
in 604 the new events in the history of Western
<pb n='143'/><anchor id='Pg143'/>
Asia led him to adapt his earlier Oracles on the
Scythians to the Chaldeans who had succeeded
the Scythians as the expected Doom from the
North&mdash;then our way through the evidence becomes
tolerably clear, except for the difficulty of
dating a number of his undated Oracles. What
we must not forget is the double, divergent
intention and influence of Deuteronomy, and the
fact that Josiah's reformation, though divinely
inspired, was in its progress an experiment upon
the people, whose mind and conduct beneath it
Jeremiah was appointed by God to watch and to
test.
</p>

<p>
These considerations prepare us <emph>first</emph> for the
story in Ch. XI. 1-8 of Jeremiah's fervent assent
to the ethical principles of Deuteronomy and of
the charge to him to proclaim these throughout
Judah; and <emph>then</emph> for his later attitude to the
written Law, to the Temple and to sacrifices.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
XI. 1. The Word which came to Jeremiah from
the Lord, saying:
2. Hear thou<note place='foot'>Sing. as partly in
Greek and wholly in Syriac.</note> the words of this Covenant, and
speak them to the men of Judah, and to the
inhabitants of Jerusalem. 3. And thou shalt
say to them, Thus saith the Lord, the God
of Israel: 4. Cursed be the man who hears not
the words of this Covenant, which I commanded
your fathers in the day that I brought
<pb n='144'/><anchor id='Pg144'/>
them out of the land of Egypt, out of the iron-furnace,
saying, Hearken to My Voice and
do<note place='foot'>With Greek omit <hi rend='italic'>them</hi>
of the Hebrew text.</note> according to all that I command you,
and ye shall be to Me a people, and I will be
God to you; [5] in order to establish the oath
which I sware unto your fathers, to give them
a land flowing with milk and honey, as at
this day.
6. And I answered and said, Amen, O Lord!
7. And the Lord said unto me, Proclaim<note place='foot'>Hebrew adds
<hi rend='italic'>all</hi>.</note> these
words in the cities of Judah and in the
streets of Jerusalem, saying, [8] Hear ye the
words of this Covenant and do them, but
they did them not.<note place='foot'>As above, Greek omits all of the
Hebrew verses 7, 8 except the last clause which follows naturally on verse 6.</note>
</quote>

<p>
The story has its difficulties. It is undated;
it is followed by verses 9-17, apparently from the
reign of Jehoiakim; what the Prophet is called
to hear and gives his solemn assent to is generally
described as <hi rend='italic'>this Covenant</hi>; and in verses 7 and 8
there is what may be a mere editorial addition
since the Greek Version omits it, which has led
some to assert the editorial character of the
whole. But for the reasons given above, there is
no cause to doubt the substantial truthfulness of
the story, unless with Duhm we were capable of
believing that Jeremiah never spoke in prose, nor
<pb n='145'/><anchor id='Pg145'/>
can be conceived as, at any time in his life the
advocate of what was a legal as well as a prophetic
book. Of the first of these assertions we
have already disposed;<note place='foot'>See above, pp.
<ref target="Pg040">40</ref> ff.</note> the second is met by the
fact that what Jeremiah was called to assent to
was not a legal programme but a spiritual covenant,
of which ethical obedience alone was stated
as the condition. In Josiah's reign what else
could <hi rend='italic'>this Covenant</hi> mean than the Covenant set
forth in the recently discovered Book of the Law
and solemnly avouched by the whole people?<note place='foot'>This consideration
seems to dispose of König's claim that
Jeremiah here maintains the Sinai-Covenant (with the Decalogue)
in opposition to the Moab-Covenant set forth in Deuteronomy.
How could the former be defined in the time of Josiah as <hi rend='italic'>this
Covenant</hi> or described in Deuteronomic phrases? See also
G. Douglas, <q>Book of Jeremiah,</q> p. 156.</note>
That its essence was spiritual and ethical is expressed
in the Deuteronomic phrases which
follow, and the quotation of these is most relevant
to the occasion. Nor do the recollections, the
command and the promise which they convey go
beyond what Jeremiah had already enforced in
his earlier Oracles.<note place='foot'>Dr. Skinner (<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi>,
p. 100) thinks that <q>the accumulation
of distinctively Deuteronomic phrases and ideas in verses 4, 5
implies a dependence on that book which savours strongly of
editorial workmanship.</q> But if <hi rend='italic'>this Covenant</hi>
be the Deuteronomic, as he admits, what more natural than to state it in
Deuteronomic terms, expressive as these are only of its spiritual
essence? I would also refer to what I have said on p. <ref target="Pg041">41</ref> as
to the effect on the Prophet of the new and haunting style of
Deuteronomy.</note>
</p>

<pb n='146'/><anchor id='Pg146'/>

<p>
Therefore we may believe that, as recorded,
Jeremiah heard in the heart of Deuteronomy the
call of God, that he uttered his Amen to it; and
that, from his experience of the evils of the high-places,
he felt obliged, as he also records, to
proclaim <hi rend='italic'>this Covenant</hi> throughout Judah.<note place='foot'>Dr.
Skinner's authoritative support to the substance of the
thesis maintained above is very welcome, strengthened as it is
by the point which he makes in the first of the following
sentences: <q>The deliberate invention of an incident, which had
no point of contact in the authentic record of his life, is a
procedure of which no assured parallel is found in the book.
We must at least believe that a trustworthy tradition lies behind
the passage in ch. xi; and the conclusion to which it naturally
points is that Jeremiah was at first strongly in favour of the law
of Deuteronomy, and lent his moral support to the reformation
of Josiah</q> (pp. 102-3). Wellhausen, <q>Isr. u. Jüdische Gesch.</q>
(1894, p. 97): <q>An der Einführung des Deuteronomiums hatte er
mitgewirkt, zeitlebens eiferte er gegen die illegitimen Altäre in
den Städten Judas.... Aber mit den Wirkungen der Reformation
war er keineswegs zufrieden.</q> So too J. R. Gillies, <q>Jeremiah,</q>
p. 113, and W. R. Thomson, <q>The Burden of the Lord,</q> p. 66;
and virtually so, Peake, i. 11-14.</note>
</p>

<p>
In the same chapter as the charge to the Prophet
concerning <hi rend='italic'>this Covenant</hi> there is mention of a conspiracy
against his life by the men of Anathoth,
XI. 21. Some suppose that these were enraged
by his support of reforms which abolished rural
sanctuaries like their own. But his earlier denunciations
of such shrines, delivered independently
<pb n='147'/><anchor id='Pg147'/>
of Deuteronomy, had been enough to
rouse his fellow-villagers against him as a traitor
to their local interests and pieties.
</p>

<p>
Another address, VII. 1-15, said to have been
delivered to all Judah, rebukes the people for
their false confidence in the Temple and their
abuse of it, and threatens its destruction. Editorial
additions may exist in both the Hebrew and
Greek texts of this address, but it contains phrases
non-deuteronomic and peculiar to Jeremiah, while
its echoes of Deuteronomy were natural to the
occasion. Except for a formula or two, I take the
address to be his own. Nor am I persuaded by
the majority of modern critics that it is a mere
variant of the Temple address reported in Ch.
XXVI as given <hi rend='italic'>in the beginning of the reign of
Jehoiakim</hi>. Why may Jeremiah not have spoken
more than once on the same theme to the same, or
a similar effect? Moreover, the phrase <hi rend='italic'>We are
delivered!</hi> VII. 10, which does not recur in XXVI,
suits the conditions before, rather than those after,
the Battle of Megiddo. For parallel with the
increased faith in the Temple, due mainly to the
people's consciousness of their obedience to the
Law-Book, was their experience of deliverance
from the Assyrian yoke. I am inclined, therefore,
to refer VII. 1-15 to the reign of Josiah, rather
than with XXVI to that of Jehoiakim.<note place='foot'>So, too,
H. P. Smith, <q>O.T. History,</q> p. 278, n. 2; while
Duhm, Giesebrecht, Davidson, Driver, Gillies, Peake and Skinner
all take vii. 1-15 and xxvi. to refer to the same occasion early in
Jehoiakim's reign. Duhm and Skinner remark on an apparently
incoherent association of Place ( = Holy Place) and Land in vii.
3-7. The clause about the Land may be a later addition. Yet
in verses 13-15 (the substance of which Skinner admits to be
genuine) the destruction of the Holy Place and ejection of the
people from the Land are <hi rend='italic'>both</hi> threatened.</note> But,
<pb n='148'/><anchor id='Pg148'/>
whatever be its date, VII. 1-15 is relevant to our
present discussion.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
VII. 2, 3. Hear ye the Word of the Lord, all
Judah!<note place='foot'>So simply the Greek; the longer Hebrew title, verses 1, 2
may be an expansion by an editor, who took vii. 1-15 as reporting
the same speech as xxvi. 1 ff. In verse 3 Hebrew reads <hi rend='italic'>Lord of
Hosts</hi>.</note> Thus saith the Lord, the God of
Israel&mdash;Better your ways and your doings that I
may leave you to dwell in this Place. 4. Put not
your trust on lying words,<note place='foot'>Greek adds <hi rend='italic'>for they
will be absolutely of no avail to you</hi>.</note> saying to
yourselves,<note place='foot'>So Syriac.</note>
<q>The Temple of the Lord, The Temple
of the Lord, The Temple of the Lord&mdash;[5] are
those!</q><note place='foot'>Or <hi rend='italic'>there they are!</hi>&mdash;plural
because of the complex of buildings.</note> But if ye thoroughly  better your
ways and your doings, if ye indeed do justice
between a man and his fellow, [6] and oppress not
the sojourner, the orphan, and the widow,
and shed not innocent blood [in this Place],
nor go after other gods to your hurt, [7] then
I shall leave you to abide in this Place [in
<pb n='149'/><anchor id='Pg149'/>
the land which I gave to your fathers from
of old for ever]. 8. Behold, you put your trust
on lying words that cannot profit. 9. What?
Steal, murder, fornicate, swear falsely, and
burn<note place='foot'>It is doubtful whether this verb, meaning in earlier Hebrew
<hi rend='italic'>to make any burnt offering</hi> was already confined to its later
meaning, <hi rend='italic'>to burn incense</hi>.</note> to Baal, and go after other
gods whom ye knew not, [10] yet come and stand before
Me in this House upon which My Name has
been called and say <q>We are delivered</q>&mdash;in
order to work all these abominations! 11. Is it
a robbers' den that My<note place='foot'>So Greek.</note> House [upon which
My Name has been called] has become in
your eyes? I also, behold I have seen it&mdash;Rede
of the Lord.
12. For go now to My Place which was in Shiloh,
where at first I caused My Name to dwell,
and see what I did to it because of the
wickedness of My people Israel. 13. And now
because of your doing of all these deeds [Rede
of the Lord, though I spake unto you rising
early and speaking, but ye hearkened not, and
I called you, but ye did not answer],<note place='foot'>Much
within these brackets is lacking in the Greek.</note> [14] I shall
do to the House [on which My Name has
been called] in which you are trusting, and to
the Place which I gave to you and to your
<pb n='150'/><anchor id='Pg150'/>
fathers, as I did to Shiloh. 15. And I shall cast
you out from before My Face as I cast out<note place='foot'>Hebrew
<hi rend='italic'>all</hi>.</note>
your brethren, all the seed of Ephraim.
</quote>

<p>
In this address there is nothing that contradicts
Deuteronomy. The sacredness with which the
Book had invested the One Sanctuary is acknowledged.
But the people have no moral sense
of that sacredness. Their confidence in the
Temple is material and superstitious, fostered, we
may believe, by the peace they were enjoying and
their relief from a foreign sovereignty, as well as
by their formal observance of the institutions
which the Book prescribed. What had been
founded to rally and to guide a spiritual faith they
turned into a fetish and even to an <q>indulgence</q>
for their wickedness. The House, in which Isaiah
had bent beneath the seraphs' adoration of the
Divine Holiness, and, confessing his own and his
people's sin, had received from its altar the
sacrament of pardon and of cleansing, was by this
generation not only debased to a mere pledge of
their political security but debauched into a shelter
for sins as gross as ever polluted their worship
upon the high places. So ready, as in all other
ages, were formality and vice to conspire with
each other! Jeremiah scorns the people's <emph>trust</emph> in
the Temple as utterly as he had scorned their
<emph>trust</emph> (it is the same word) in the Baals or in Egypt
<pb n='151'/><anchor id='Pg151'/>
and Assyria. The change in the pivot of their
false confidence is to be marked. So much at least
had Deuteronomy effected&mdash;shifting their trust
from foreign gods and states to something founded
by their own God, yet leaving it material, and
unable to restrain them from bringing along with
it their old obdurate vices.
</p>

<p>
Whether, then, this address was delivered in
Josiah's reign or early in Jehoiakim's it affords no
reason for our denying it to Jeremiah. As God's
tester of the people he has been watching their response
to the Revelation they had accepted, and has
proved that their obedience was to the letter of this
and not to its spirit, that while they superstitiously
revered its institutions they shamelessly ignored
its ethics. For just such vices as they still
practised God Himself must take vengeance. As
those had deranged the very seasons and were
leading to the overthrow of the state,<note place='foot'>Verses
9, 25, 29, etc.</note> no one could
hope that the Temple would escape their consequences.
And there was that precedent of the
destruction of Israel's first sanctuary in Shiloh, the
ruins of which, as we have seen, lay not far from
Jeremiah's home at Anathoth.<note place='foot'>See above, p.
<ref target="Pg072">72</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
Another Oracle, XI. 15, 16, also undated, seems,
like the last passage, best explained as delivered
by Jeremiah while he watched during the close
of Josiah's reign the hardening of the people's
trust in their religious institutions and felt its
<pb n='152'/><anchor id='Pg152'/>
futility; or alternatively when that futility was
exposed by the defeat at Megiddo. It has, however,
been woven by some hand or other into a
passage reflecting the revival of the Baal-worship
under Jehoiakim (verse 17; its connection with
the prose sentence preceding is also doubtful).
Copyists have wrought havoc with the Hebrew
text, but as the marginal note of our Revisers
indicates, the sense may be restored from the
Greek. <hi rend='italic'>My Beloved</hi> is, of course, Israel.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>What has My Beloved to do in My house,&nbsp;&nbsp;XI. 15</l>
<l>Working out mischief?</l>
<l>Vows, holy flesh! Can such things turn</l>
<l>Calamity from thee;</l>
<l>Or by these thou escape?<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Vows</hi>, so Greek,
but Lucian <hi rend='italic'>fat pieces</hi> (Lev. vi. 5); <hi rend='italic'>by these
thou escape</hi>, so Greek, Hebrew <hi rend='italic'>then mightest thou
rejoice</hi>.</note></l>
<l>Flourishing olive, fair with fruit,&nbsp;&nbsp;16</l>
<l>God called thy name.</l>
<l>To the noise of a mighty roaring</l>
<l>He sets her on fire&mdash;</l>
<l>Blasted her branches!</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
The first of these verses repeats the charge of
VII. 2-11: the people use the Temple for their
sins. The word rendered <hi rend='italic'>mischief</hi> is literally
<hi rend='italic'>devices</hi>, and the meaning may be intrigues hatched
from their false ideas of the Temple's security.
But the word is mostly used of <hi rend='italic'>evil devices</hi> and
here the Greek has <hi rend='italic'>abomination</hi>. As with their
<pb n='153'/><anchor id='Pg153'/>
Temple so with their vows and sacrifices. All
are useless because of their wickedness. The
nation must be punished. The second verse may
well have been uttered after the defeat at Megiddo,
or may be a prediction on the eve of that disaster
to <hi rend='italic'>the branches</hi> of the nation, which the nation as
a whole survived.
</p>

<p>
This leads to another and more difficult question.
Jeremiah has spoken doom on the Temple
and the Nation; has he come to doubt the Law-Book
itself or any part of it? As to that there
are two passages one of which speaks of a falsification
of the Law by its guardians, while the
other denies the Divine origin not only of the
deuteronomic but of all sacrifices and burnt
offerings.
</p>

<p>
Even before the discovery of the Law-Book the
young prophet had said of <hi rend='italic'>those who handle the Law</hi>
that <hi rend='italic'>they did not know the Lord</hi>.<note place='foot'>ii. 8,
see above, p. <ref target="Pg092">92</ref>.</note> And now in an
Oracle, apparently of date after the discovery, he
charges the scribes with manipulating <emph>the Law</emph>,
the <emph>Torah</emph>, so as to turn it to falsehood. The
Oracle is addressed to the people of whom he has
just said that they do not know <hi rend='italic'>the Rule, the
Mishpaṭ, of the Lord</hi>.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>How say you, <q rend='pre'>We are the Wise,</q>&nbsp;&nbsp;VIII. 8</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='post'>The Law of the Lord is with us.</q></l>
<l>But lo, the falsing pen of the scribes</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Hath wrought it to falsehood.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<pb n='154'/><anchor id='Pg154'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Torah</hi>, literally <hi rend='italic'>direction</hi> or
<hi rend='italic'>instruction</hi>, is either a
single law or a body of law, revealed by God
through priests or prophets, for the religious and
moral practice of men. Here it is some traditional
or official form of such law, for which the people
have rejected the Word of the Lord&mdash;His living
Word by the prophets of the time (verse 9).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Put to shame are the wise,&nbsp;&nbsp;9</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Dismayed and taken.</l>
<l>Lo, they have spurned the Word of the Lord&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>What wisdom is theirs?</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Was this <hi rend='italic'>Torah</hi> oral or written? And if written
was it the discovered Book of the <hi rend='italic'>Torah</hi>, which in
part at least was our Deuteronomy?
</p>

<p>
So far as the text goes the original <hi rend='italic'>Torah</hi> may
have been either oral or written, and the scribes
have <hi rend='italic'>falsified</hi> it, by amplification or
distortion,<note place='foot'>Cp. the similar charge of Christ
against the scribes.</note>
either when reducing it for the first time to writing
or when copying and editing it from an already
written form. This leaves open these further
questions. If written was the <hi rend='italic'>Torah</hi> the very
<hi rend='italic'>Book of the Torah</hi> discovered in the Temple in 621-20?
And if so did the falsification affect the whole
or only part of the Book? To these questions
some answer No, on the ground of Jeremiah's
assent to <hi rend='italic'>this Covenant</hi>, and the command to him
<pb n='155'/><anchor id='Pg155'/>
to proclaim it.<note place='foot'>xi. 1 ff.; so Giesebrecht
on viii. 8.</note> Others answer Yes; in their
view Jeremiah was opposed to the deuteronomic
system as a whole, or at least to the detailed laws
of ritual added to the prophetic and spiritual
principles of the Book.<note place='foot'>Marti, <hi rend='italic'>Gesch.
der Isr. Religion</hi>, 154, 166; Duhm, and especially
Cornill, <hi rend='italic'>in loco</hi>.</note> Another possibility is
that Jeremiah had in view those first essays in
writing of a purely priestly law-book, which resulted
during the Exile in the so-called Priests'
Code now incorporated in the Pentateuch. In
our ignorance both of the original form of Deuteronomy
and of the extent and character of the
activity of the scribes during the reign of Josiah
we might hesitate to decide among these possibilities
were it not for the following address
which there is no good reason for denying to
Jeremiah.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
VII. 21. Thus saith the Lord,<note place='foot'>Hebrew adds
<hi rend='italic'>of Hosts, the God of Israel</hi>.</note> Your burnt
offerings add to your sacrifices and eat flesh<note place='foot'>The
former were not, the latter were in part, eaten by the worshipper;
but it does not matter if now he eats them all alike!</note>!
22. For I spake not with your fathers nor
charged them, in the day that I brought them
forth from the land of Egypt, concerning
burnt-offering and sacrifice. 23. But with this
Word I charged them, saying, Hearken to
My Voice, and I shall be to you God, and
<pb n='156'/><anchor id='Pg156'/>
ye shall be to Me a people, and ye shall walk
in every way that I charge you, that it may
be well with you.
</quote>

<p>
Whether from Jeremiah or not, this is one of the
most critical texts of the Old Testament because
while repeating what the Prophet has already
fervently accepted,<note place='foot'>xi. 1 ff.: above, pp.
<ref target="Pg143">143</ref> ff.</note> that the terms of the deuteronomic
Covenant were simply obedience to the
ethical demands of God, it contradicts Deuteronomy
and even more strongly Leviticus, in their repeated
statements that in the wilderness God
also commanded sacrifices. The issue is so grave
that there have been attempts to evade it. None,
however, can be regarded as successful. That
which would weaken the Hebrew phrase, rightly
rendered <hi rend='italic'>concerning</hi> by our versions, into
<hi rend='italic'>for the sake of</hi> or <hi rend='italic'>in the interest of</hi>
(as if all the speaker intended was that animal sacrifice was not the
chief end or main interest of the Divine legislation)
is doubtful philologically, nor meets the fact that
all the Hebrew codes assign an indispensable
value to sacrifice. Inadmissible also is the suggestion
that the phrase means <hi rend='italic'>concerning the details
of</hi>, for Deuteronomy and especially Leviticus emphasise
the details of burnt-offering and sacrifice.
Nor is the plausible argument convincing that
the Prophet spoke relatively, and meant only
what Samuel meant by <hi rend='italic'>Obedience is better than sacrifice</hi>,
<pb n='157'/><anchor id='Pg157'/>
or Hosea by <hi rend='italic'>The Knowledge of God is more than
burnt-offerings</hi>.<note place='foot'>Sam. xv. 22, Hos. vi. 6.
Those who take the passage relatively also quote Paul's words
that Christ sent him not to baptize but to preach the gospel,
1 Cor. i. 17.</note> Nor are there grounds for thinking
that the Prophet had in view only the Ten
Commandments; while finally to claim that he
spoke in hyperbole is a forlorn hope of an argument.
In answer to all these evasions it is enough
to point out that the question is not merely that
of the value of sacrifice, but whether during the
Exodus the God of Israel gave any charge concerning
sacrifice; as well as the fact that others
than Jeremiah had either explicitly questioned
this or implicitly denied it. When Amos, in
God's Name repelled the burnt-offerings of his
generation he asked, <hi rend='italic'>Did ye bring unto Me sacrifices
and offerings in the wilderness forty years, O House of
Israel?</hi> and obviously expected a negative answer.
And the following passages only render more
general the truth that Israel's God has no
pleasure at any time in the sacrifices offered to
Him, with the institution of which&mdash;the natural
inference is&mdash;He can have had nothing to do. <hi rend='italic'>Will
the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams or with ten
thousands of rivers of oil. Shall I give my first-born
for my transgression, the fruit of my body for the sin of
my soul? He hath declared to thee, O man, what is good:
and what doth the Lord require of thee but to do justly,
and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God.</hi>
<pb n='158'/><anchor id='Pg158'/>
And these two utterances in the Psalms: <hi rend='italic'>Shall I
eat the flesh of bulls or drink the blood of goats? Offer
unto God thanksgiving and pay thy vows to the Most
High</hi>; and <hi rend='italic'>Thou desirest not sacrifice else would I
give it, Thou delightest not in burnt-offering, The
sacrifices of God are a broken spirit</hi>.<note place='foot'>Amos v. 25;
Micah vi. 6-8; Ps. l. 13, 14; li. 16, 17.</note>
</p>

<p>
For the accuracy of these assertions or implications
by a succession of prophets and psalmists
there is a remarkable body of historical evidence.
The sacrificial system of Israel is in its origins of
far earlier date than the days of Moses and the
Exodus from Egypt. It has so much, both of form
and meaning, in common with the systems of
kindred nations as to prove it to be part of the
heritage naturally derived by all of them from
their Semitic forefathers. And the new element
brought into the traditional religion of Israel at
Sinai was just that on which Jeremiah lays
stress&mdash;the ethical, which in time purified the
ritual of sacrifice and burnt-offering but had
nothing to do with the origins of this.
</p>

<p>
Therefore it is certain <emph>first</emph> that Amos and
Jeremiah meant literally what they stated or
implicitly led their hearers to infer&mdash;God gave no
commands at the Exodus concerning burnt-offerings
and sacrifices&mdash;and <emph>second</emph> that historically
they were correct. But, of course, their interest
in so saying was not historical but spiritual.
<pb n='159'/><anchor id='Pg159'/>
Their aim was practical&mdash;to destroy their generation's
materialist belief that animal sacrifice was
the indispensable part of religion and worship.
Still his way of putting it involves on the part of
Jeremiah a repudiation of the statements of
Deuteronomy on the subject. So far, then,
Jeremiah opposed the new Book of the Law.<note place='foot'>See Robertson
Smith, <q>The O.T. in the Jewish Church,</q>
2nd ed., 203, 295 (1892), and Edghill, <q>The Evidential Value
of Prophecy</q> (1904), 274, one of the best works on the O.T. in
our time.</note>
</p>

<p>
But with all this do not let us forget something
more. While thus anticipating by more than six
centuries the abolition of animal sacrifices,
Jeremiah, by his example of service and suffering,
was illustrating the substitute for them&mdash;the
<emph>human</emph> sacrifice, the surrender by man himself of
will and temper, and if need be of life, for the
cause of righteousness and the salvation of his
fellow-men. The recognition of this in Jeremiah
by a later generation in Israel led to the conception
of the suffering Servant of the Lord, and of
the power of His innocent sufferings to atone for
sinners and to redeem them.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='stars: 5'/>

<p>
This starts a kindred point&mdash;and the last&mdash;upon
which Jeremiah offers, if not a contradiction, at
least a contrast and a supplement to the teaching
of Deuteronomy. We have noted the absoluteness&mdash;or
idealism&mdash;of that Book's doctrines of
<pb n='160'/><anchor id='Pg160'/>
Morality and Providence; they leave no room
for certain problems, raised by the facts of life.
But Jeremiah had bitter experience of those facts,
and it moved him to state the problems to God
Himself. He owns the perfect justice of God;
but this only makes his questioning more urgent.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Too righteous art Thou O Lord,&nbsp;&nbsp;XII. 1</l>
<l>That with Thee I should argue,</l>
<l>Yet cases there are I must speak to Thee of:</l>
<l>The way of the wicked&mdash;why doth it prosper,</l>
<l>And the treacherous all be at ease?</l>
<l>Thou hast planted them, yea they take root,&nbsp;&nbsp;2</l>
<l>They get on, yea they make fruit;</l>
<l>Near in their mouths art Thou,</l>
<l>But far from their hearts.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
We shall have to deal with these questions
and God's answer to them, when in a later lecture
we analyse Jeremiah's religious experience and
struggles. Here we only note the contrast which
they present to Deuteronomy&mdash;a contrast between
the Man and the System, between Experience and
Dogma, between the Actual and the Ideal. And,
as we now see, it was the System and the Dogma
that were defective and the Man and his Experience
of life that started, if not for himself yet for
a later generation, pondering his experience, the
solution of those problems, which against the
deuteronomic teaching he raised in brave agony
to God's own face.
</p>

<pb n='161'/><anchor id='Pg161'/>

<p>
Such serious differences between Jeremiah and
Deuteronomy&mdash;upon the Law, the Temple, the
Sacrifices, and Doctrines of Providence and
Morality&mdash;suggest an important question with
regard to the methods of Divine Revelation under
the Old Covenant. Do they not prove that among
those methods there were others than vision or
intuition springing from the direct action of the
Spirit of God upon the spirits of individual men?
Are they not instances of the processes by which
to this day in the Providence of God truth
is sifted and ultimately beaten out&mdash;namely
debate and controversy between different minds
or different schools of thought, between earnest
supporters of various and often hostile opinions
in neither of which lies the whole of the truth?
The evidence for Revelation by Argument which
the Book of Jeremiah affords is not the least of
its contributions to the history and philosophy of
religion.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='162'/><anchor id='Pg162'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index="toc" level1="Lecture V. Under Jehoiakim."/>
<index index="pdf" level1="Lecture V."/>
<head type='sub'>Lecture V.</head>
<head>Under Jehoiakim. 608-597-8 <hi rend='smallcaps'>B.C.</hi></head>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<head>1. From Megiddo to Carchemish, 608-605.</head>

<p>
Josiah's faithful reign, and with it all thorough
efforts to fulfil the National Covenant,<note place='foot'>II. Chron.
xxxv. 20, <hi rend='italic'>when he had set the Temple again in
order</hi>.</note> came to a
tragic close on the field of Megiddo&mdash;the Flodden
of Judah.
</p>

<p>
The year was 608 <hi rend='smallcaps'>B.C.</hi> Medes and Chaldeans
together had either taken, or were still besieging,
Nineveh; and Pharaoh Nĕcoh,<note place='foot'>Or Nechoh or Neco
as in our own versions: Heb. נכוה or נכו.</note> eager to win
for Egypt a share of the crumbling Assyrian
Empire, had started north with a great army.
Marching by the coast he first took Gaza, and
crossing by one of the usual passes from
Sharon to Esdraelon,<note place='foot'><q>H. G. H. L.,</q>
p. 151.</note> found himself opposed
near Megiddo by a Jewish force led by its king
in person. The Chronicler tells us that Nĕcoh
<pb n='163'/><anchor id='Pg163'/>
sought to turn Josiah from his desperate venture:
<hi rend='italic'>What have I to do with thee? I am come not against
thee but against the House with which I am at war.
God hath spoken to speed me; forbear from God who is
with me, lest He destroy thee.</hi><note place='foot'>II. Chron. xxxv. 21.
This may be only the reflection of later Jewish piety on
so perplexing a disaster; but it rings like fact.</note> But Josiah persisted.
The issue of so unequal a contest could not be
doubtful. The Jewish army was routed and
Josiah himself immediately slain.<note place='foot'>II. King xxiii. 29,
<hi rend='italic'>as soon as he saw him</hi>. For other records
of Nĕcoh's northward march see <ref target="Appendix_II">Appendix II</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
At first sight, the courage of Josiah and his
small people in facing the full force of Egypt
seems to deserve our admiration, as much as did
the courage of King Albert and his nation in opposing
the faithless invasion of Belgium by the
Germans aiming at France. There was, however,
a difference. Nĕcoh was not invading
Judah, but crossing Philistine territory and a
Galilee which had long ceased to be Israel's.
Some suppose that since the Assyrian hold upon
Palestine relaxed, Josiah had gradually occupied
all Samaria. If this be so, was he now stirred by
a gallant sense of duty to assert Israel's ancient
claim to Galilee as well? We cannot tell.<note place='foot'>The
idea that Josiah fought Nĕcoh, as an Assyrian vassal
(Benzinger on II. Kings xxiii. 28-30) is, of course, quite improbable,
even if Nineveh did not fall till 606. But if the latest
datum is correct that Nineveh fell in 612 (see
<ref target="Appendix_I">Appendix I</ref>) it is
utterly groundless.</note> But
<pb n='164'/><anchor id='Pg164'/>
what we may confidently assume is that, having
fulfilled by thirteen years of honest reforms his
own part of the terms of the Covenant, Josiah
believed that he could surely count on the Divine
fulfilment of the rest, and that some miracle would
bring to a righteous king and people victory over
the heathen, however more powerful the heathen
might be. He was only thirty-nine years of age.
</p>

<p>
His servants carried his body from the field in
a chariot to Jerusalem, bringing him back, as we
may realise, to a people stricken with consternation.
Their trust in the Temple was shaken&mdash;they
were not <hi rend='italic'>delivered</hi>!<note place='foot'>See above, p.
<ref target="Pg149">149</ref>.</note> In the circumstances
they did their feeble best by raising to the vacant
throne Josiah's son, Shallum, as Jehoahaz, <hi rend='italic'>the
Lord hath taken hold</hi>. But the new name proved
no omen of good. In three months Nĕcoh had
the youth in bonds at Riblah, in the land of
Hamath, <hi rend='italic'>that he might not reign in Jerusalem</hi>, and
afterwards took him to Egypt. Of this fresh
sorrow Jeremiah sang as if it had drowned out
the sorrow of Megiddo&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Weep not for the dead,&nbsp;&nbsp;XXII. 10</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Nor bemoan him,</l>
<l>But for him that goeth away weep sore,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>For he cometh no more,</l>
<l>Nor seeth the land of his birth.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Jehoahaz died in Egypt.
</p>

<pb n='165'/><anchor id='Pg165'/>

<p>
The next King, Jehoiakim, another of Josiah's
sons, was set on the throne by Nĕcoh, who also
exacted a heavy tribute. What national disillusion!
The hopes falsely kindled upon the letter
of Deuteronomy lay quenched on Megiddo; and
the faithful servant of the Covenant had, in spite
of its promises as men would argue, been defeated
and slain in the flower of his life. Judah
had been released from the Assyrian yoke, only
to fall into the hands of another tyrant, her new
king his creature, and her people sorely burdened
to pay him. The result was religious confusion.
In at least a formal obedience to the deuteronomic
laws of worship, the people of the land continued
to resort to the Temple fasts and festivals.<note place='foot'>xxvi.
2, xxxvi. 9.</note> But
resenting the failure of their God to grant victory
numbers relapsed into an idolatry as rank as that
under Ahaz or Manasseh;<note place='foot'>Whether the
sacrifices of children in Hinnom had been resumed,
vii. 31 ff., is uncertain; yet this passage may well belong
to Jehoiakim's reign.</note> while others, more
thoughtful but not less bewildered, conceived
doubts of the worth of righteousness. And these
tempers were embittered by the cruel selfishness
of the new monarch and his reckless injustice.
To the taxes required for the tribute to Egypt
he added other exactions in order to meet his extravagance
in enlarging and adorning his palace.
The crime, with which Jeremiah charges him in
<pb n='166'/><anchor id='Pg166'/>
the following lines, is one to which small kings
in the East have often been tempted by their
contact with civilisations richer than their own.
On Judah Jehoiakim imposed the cruel corvée,
which in our day Ismail Pasha imposed upon
Egypt.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Woe to who builds his house by injustice,&nbsp;&nbsp;XXII. 13</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His storeys by wrong,</l>
<l>Who forces his fellows to serve for nothing,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And pays not their wage.</l>
<l>Who saith,<note place='foot'>Greek omits and renders
the following <hi rend='italic'>I</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>my</hi>
by <hi rend='italic'>thou</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>his</hi>.</note>&nbsp;&nbsp;14</l>
<l>I will build me an ampler house</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And airier storeys,</l>
<l>Widen my windows, panel with cedar,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And paint with vermilion,</l>
<l>Wilt thou thus play the king,&nbsp;&nbsp;15</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Fussing with cedar?</l>
<l>Thy sire, did not he eat and drink,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And do justice and right,</l>
<l>And judge for the poor and the needy?&nbsp;&nbsp;16</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Then was it well!<note place='foot'><p>Using the Greek,
Duhm, Cornill and Skinner render this quatrain thus:&mdash;
</p>
<p>
Did not thy father eat and drink,<lb/>
And do himself well?<lb/>
Yet he practised justice and right,<lb/>
Judged the cause of the needy and poor.
</p></note></l>
<pb n='167'/><anchor id='Pg167'/>
<l>Was not this how to know Me?&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Rede of the Lord.</l>
<l>But thine eyes and thy heart are on nought&nbsp;&nbsp;17</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Save thine own spoil,</l>
<l>And on shedding of innocent blood,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Doing outrage and murder.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Josiah had enjoyed what was enough for him
in sober, seemly parallel to his faithful discharge
of duty; his son was luxurious, unscrupulous,
bloody, and withal petty&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>fussing with cedar</hi>, and
cutting up the Prophet's roll piece by piece with
a pen-knife! Jeremiah and Baruch's sarcastic
notes on Jehoiakim find parallels in Victor Hugo's
<q>Châtiments</q> of Napoleon III.: <q>l'infiniment petit,
monstreux et feroce;</q> <q>Voici de l'or, viens pille
et vole ... voici du sang, accours, viens boire,
petit, petit!</q>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
XXII. 18. Therefore, thus saith the Lord of
Jehoiakim, son of Josiah, King of Judah.
</p>
<lg>
<l>Mourn him they shall not, <q>Woe brother!</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>Woe sister!</q></l>
<l>Nor beweep him, <q>Woe Lord!</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Or <q>Woe Highness!</q></l>
<l>With the burial of an ass shall they bury him,&nbsp;&nbsp;19</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Dragged and flung out&mdash;</l>
<l>Out from the gates of Jerusalem.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Such a prophet to such a king must have been
intolerable, and through the following years
Jeremiah was pursued by the royal hatred.
<pb n='168'/><anchor id='Pg168'/>
There were other and more poisonous enemies.
We have found him, from the first, steadily seeing
through, and stoutly denouncing the great religious
orders&mdash;the priests, natural believers in the
Temple, with a belief, since Deuteronomy came
into their hands, more dogmatic and arrogant
than ever; and the professional prophets with
their shallow optimism that all was well for
Judah, and that her God could never bring upon
her the doom which Jeremiah threatened in His
Name. <hi rend='italic'>Not He!</hi> was their answer to him.
These two classes were in conspiracy, deluding
themselves and the people; in their trust upon
the letter of the Law, they had no sense, as he
told them, of <hi rend='italic'>The Living God</hi>.<note place='foot'>ii. 8,
31, v. 30, 31, vi. 13, 14, 19, etc.; see pp. <ref target="Pg106">106</ref>,
<ref target="Pg154">154</ref>, etc.</note> Roused by his
scorn they watched for an occasion to convict and
destroy him.<note place='foot'>xx. 10.</note>
</p>

<p>
This he bravely gave by making, in obedience
to God's call, public prediction of the ruin of the
Temple. It is uncertain whether Jeremiah did
so only once, as many think who read in Chs.
VII and XXVI reports of the same address, or
whether, as I am inclined to believe, the former
chapter reports an address delivered under Josiah,
and the latter the repetition of its substance in
the beginning of the reign of Jehoiakim.<note place='foot'>See above, pp.
<ref target="Pg147">147</ref> ff.</note> However
this be, Ch. XXVI alone relates the consequences
of his outspoken courage. It represents
<pb n='169'/><anchor id='Pg169'/>
the priests and the prophets as quoting his
sentence upon the Temple in absolute terms;
though both reports, in the form in which they
have reached us, render his own delivery of it as
conditional upon the nation's refusal to repent and
to better their ways.<note place='foot'>Many take
the conditional clauses in vii and xxvi to be later
insertions (e.g. Skinner, 169 f.). But it was natural to the
malice of his foes to distort Jeremiah's conditional, into an absolute,
threat, and in xxvi. 13 he corrects them. My translation
follows the Greek version, and omits the Hebrew additions
which are found in our English versions.</note> This, of course, was ever
their way; they were ready distorters.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
XXVI. 1. In the beginning of the reign of Jehoiakim,
son of Josiah, came this word from the
Lord. 2. Thus saith the Lord, Stand in the
court of the Lord's House and speak unto all
Judah, all who come in to worship in the
Lord's House, all the words that I have
charged thee to speak to them; keep back
not a word. 3. Peradventure they will hearken
and turn every man from his evil way, and I
shall relent of the evil which I am purposing
to do to them because of the evil of their
doings. 4. And thou shalt say, Thus saith the
Lord: If ye will not obey Me to walk in My
Law, which I have set before you, [5] to hearken
to the words of My servants, the prophets
whom I am sending to you, rising early and
sending&mdash;but ye have not hearkened&mdash;[6] then
<pb n='170'/><anchor id='Pg170'/>
shall I render this House like Shiloh and this
City a thing to be cursed of all nations of the
earth.
7. And the priests and the prophets and all
the people heard Jeremiah speaking these
words in the House of the Lord. 8. And it was,
when Jeremiah finished speaking all that the
Lord had charged him to speak to all the
people, that the priests and the prophets<note place='foot'>Both text
and versions add here <hi rend='italic'>and all the people</hi>; but this
may be the careless insertion of a copyist, for in what follows
the people are with Jeremiah.</note> laid
hold on him saying, Thou shalt surely die!
9. Because thou hast prophesied in the Name
of the Lord saying, As Shiloh this House
shall be, and this City shall be laid waste
without a dweller. And all the people were
gathered to Jeremiah in the House of the
Lord.
10. When the princes of Judah heard of these
things they came up from the king's house to
the House of the Lord and took their seats
in the opening of the New Gate of the Lord's
House.<note place='foot'>So 34 MSS., and Syr. Vulg. and Targ.</note>
11. Then said the priests and the
prophets to the princes and to all the people&mdash;Sentence
of death for this man! For he
hath prophesied against this City as ye have
heard with your ears.
<pb n='171'/><anchor id='Pg171'/>
12. And Jeremiah said to the princes and to
all the people, The Lord hath sent me to
prophesy against this House and against this
City all the words which ye have heard. 13. So
now better your ways and your doings, and
hearken to the Voice of the Lord, that the
Lord may relent of the evil which He hath
spoken against you. 14. But as for me, here am
I in your hand! Do to me as is good and
right in your eyes. 15. Only know for sure that
if ye put me to death ye will be bringing
innocent blood upon yourselves, and upon
this City and upon her inhabitants; for in
truth the Lord did send me unto you to
speak in your ears all these words.
16. And the princes and all the people said to
the priests and the prophets, Not for this
man be sentence of death, because in the
Name of the Lord our God hath he spoken
to us.
17. Then arose some of the elders of the land
and said to all the assembly of the people.
18. There was Micaiah the Morasthite in the
days of Hezekiah, king of Judah, and he said
to all the people of Judah, Thus saith the
Lord:
Ṣion like a field shall be ploughed,
And Jerusalem be heaps,
And the mount of the House a mound of the jungle.
<pb n='172'/><anchor id='Pg172'/>
19. Did Hezekiah and all Judah put him to death?
Did they not fear the Lord and soothe the
Lord's face, and the Lord relented of the
evil He had uttered against them. Yet we
are about to do a great wrong upon our own
lives.
</quote>

<p>
Several of its features lift this story to a place
among the most impressive in the Old Testament.
The priests and prophets on the one side and the
princes on the other both use the phrase, that
Jeremiah <hi rend='italic'>spoke in the Name of the Lord</hi>. But the
former quote it ironically, or in indignation at
the Prophet's claim, while the princes are obviously
impressed by his sincerity and apparently
their impression is shared by the people. There
could be no firmer measure of the pitch of personal
power to which Jeremiah has at last braced himself.
</p>

<p>
The promise of his Call is fulfilled. Sceptical,
fluid and shrinking as he is by nature, he stands
for this hour at least, <hi rend='italic'>a strong wall and a fortress</hi>,
by his clear conscience, his simple courage, and
his full surrender to whatever be in store for him.
How bravely he refuses to conciliate them!&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>I
am in your hand, do to me as is right in your eyes.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Again, there is proof of a popular tradition and
conscience in Israel more sound than those of the
religious authorities of the nation. The people
remembered what their priests and prophets
forgot or ignored, and through their elders gave
<pb n='173'/><anchor id='Pg173'/>
utterance to it on the side of justice. In agreement
with them were the princes, the lay leaders
of the nation. To ecclesiastics of every age and
race this is a lesson, to give heed to <q>the common
sense</q> and to the public instinct for justice. And
on that day in Jerusalem these were called forth
by the ability of the people, commoners and
nobles alike, to recognise a real Prophet, an
authentic Speaker-for-God at once when they
heard him.
</p>

<p>
The danger that Jeremiah faced and the source
from which it sprang are revealed by the fate
which befell another denouncer of the land in the
Name of the Lord. Of him, the narrator uses a
form of the verb <hi rend='italic'>to prophesy</hi> different from that
which he uses of Jeremiah, thus guarding himself
from expressing an opinion as to whether the
man was a genuine prophet. This is a further
tribute to the moral effect of Jeremiah's person
and word.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
XXVI. 20. There was also a man who took upon
him to prophesy in the Name of the Lord,
Urijahu, son of Shemajahu, from Kiriath-jearim,
and he prophesied<note place='foot'>Hebrew adds
<hi rend='italic'>against this city and</hi>.</note> against this land,
according to all the words of Jeremiah. 21. And
king Jehoiakim<note place='foot'>Hebrew adds
<hi rend='italic'>and all his mighty men</hi>.</note> and all the princes heard of
his words and they sought<note place='foot'>So Greek; Hebrew
<hi rend='italic'>the king sought</hi>.</note> to put him to
<pb n='174'/><anchor id='Pg174'/>
death; and Urijahu heard and fearing fled
and went into Egypt. 22. And the king sent men
to Egypt.<note place='foot'>Hebrew adds a name
(<hi rend='italic'>El-nathan, son of Ackbor</hi>) and
repeats.</note> 23. And they took forth Urijah thence
and brought him to the king, and slew him
with the sword, and cast his corpse into the
graves of the sons of the people.
24. But the hand of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan,
was with Jeremiah so as not to give him
into the hand of the people to put him to
death.
</quote>

<p>
The one shall be taken and the other left!
We are not told why, after the verdict of the
princes and the people, Ahikam's intervention
was needed. Yet the people were always fickle,
and the king who is not mentioned in connection
with Jeremiah's case, but as we see from Urijah's
watched cruelly from the background, was not
the man to be turned by a popular verdict from
taking vengeance on the Prophet who had attacked
him. Ahikam, however, had influence at court,
and proved friendly to Jeremiah on other occasions.<note place='foot'>II. Kings xxii.
12 ff.; Jer. xxxix. 14, xl. 5, 6.</note>
</p>

<p>
All this was <hi rend='italic'>in the beginning of the reign of Jehoiakim</hi>.
Before we follow Jeremiah himself through
the rest of that malignant and disastrous reign,
during which the steadfastness that his personality
had achieved was again to be shaken, we must
<pb n='175'/><anchor id='Pg175'/>
understand the progress of the great events
which directed his own conduct and gradually
determined the fate of his people.
</p>

<p>
In 625 <hi rend='smallcaps'>B.C.</hi> the successor of Asshurbanipal upon
the tottering throne of Assyria had found himself
compelled to acknowledge Nabopolassar the
Chaldean as nominally viceroy, but virtually king,
of Babylon.<note place='foot'>The designations of the title differ; what is
stated above was probably the fact.</note> The able chief of a vigorous race,
Nabopolassar bided his time for a vaster sovereignty,
and steadily this came to him. The
Medes, twice baffled in their attempts on Nineveh,<note place='foot'>See
<ref target="Appendix_I">Appendix I</ref>.</note>
made terms with him for a united assault on the
Assyrian capital and for the division of its empire.
To that assault Nineveh fell in 612 or 606,<note place='foot'>As vividly described,
or predicted, by Nahum; see the writer's <q>Twelve Prophets,</q> vol. ii.;
on the date see <ref target="Appendix_I">Appendix I</ref>.</note> and
with her fall Assyria disappeared from among
the Northern Powers. Whatever part of the
derelict empire the Medes may have secured,
Mesopotamia remained with the Chaldeans who
doubtless claimed as well all its provinces south
of the Euphrates. But, as we have seen, Nĕcoh
of Egypt had already overrun these and battle
between him and the Chaldeans became imminent.
Their armies met in 605-4 at Carchemish on
The River. Nĕcoh was defeated by Nebuchadrezzar,
son of Nabopolassar, and driven south to
<pb n='176'/><anchor id='Pg176'/>
his own land. Egypt had failed; and the northern
caldrons, as Jeremiah from the first predicted,
again boiled with the fate of Judah and her
neighbours. <hi rend='italic'>The Foe</hi>, though no longer the
Scythian of his early expectations, was still <hi rend='italic'>out of
the North</hi>.
</p>

<p>
By 602, if not before, Nebuchadrezzar, having
succeeded his father as King of Babylon, carried
his power to the coasts of the Levant and the
Egyptian border. Judah was his vassal, and for
three years Jehoiakim paid him tribute, but then
defaulted, probably because of promises from
Egypt after the fashion of that restless power.
As if not yet ready to invade Judah in force,
Nebuchadrezzar let loose upon her, along with
some of his own Chaldeans, troops of Moabites,
Ammonites and Arameans. Soon afterwards
Jehoiakim died and was succeeded by his son
Jehoiachin, a youth of eighteen, who appears to
have maintained his father's policy; for in 598, if
not 597, Nebuchadrezzar came up against Jerusalem,
which forthwith surrendered, and the king,
his mother and wives, his courtiers and statesmen
were carried into exile, with the craftsmen and
smiths and all who were <hi rend='italic'>apt for war; none remained
save the poorest of the people of the land</hi>.<note place='foot'>II.
Kings xxiv. 1-16. The chronology of the end of Jehoiakim's
reign is uncertain. Most have held that the three years of his
tribute were his last years, 600-598. But Winckler (<q>A.T.
Untersuchungen,</q> 81 ff.) gives good reasons for preferring
605-3.</note>
</p>

<pb n='177'/><anchor id='Pg177'/>

<p>
Throughout these convulsions of her world,
this crisis in the history of Judah herself, Jeremiah
remains the one constant, rational, and
far-seeing power in the national life. But at
what terrible cost to himself! His experience
is a throng of tragic paradoxes. Faithful to his
mission, every effort he makes to rouse his people
to its meaning is baffled. His word is signally
vindicated by the great events of the time, yet
each of these but tears his heart the more as he
feels it bringing nearer the ruin of his people.
His word is confirmed, but he is shaken by
doubts of himself, his utterance of which is in
poignant contrast to his steadfast delivery of his
messages of judgment. No prophet was at once
more sure of his word and less sure of himself;
none save Christ more sternly denounced his
people or upon the edge of their doom more
closely knit himself to them.
</p>

<p>
It is a staggering world, and the one man who
has its secret is shaken to despair about himself.
Yet the Word with which he is charged not
only fulfils itself in event after event but holds
its distracted prophet fast to the end of his abhorred
task of proclaiming it.
</p>

<p>
The cardinal event was Nebuchadrezzar's
victory over Nĕcoh at Carchemish in 605 or 604
with its assurance of Babylonian, not Egyptian,
supremacy throughout Western Asia. Such confirmation
of the substance of Jeremiah's prophecies
<pb n='178'/><anchor id='Pg178'/>
of the past twenty-three years was that Divine
signal which flashed on him to reduce those
prophecies to writing and have them recited to
the people by Baruch. We have already followed
the story in Ch. XXXVI of how this was
done<note place='foot'>See above, pp. <ref target="Pg022">22</ref> ff. Our versions
render the Hebrew correctly, but the following emendations may be made from the
Greek: Verse 1, for <hi rend='italic'>this word ... from the Lord</hi> read
<hi rend='italic'>the word of the Lord came unto me</hi>; 2, for
<hi rend='italic'>Israel</hi> read <hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>; 22, omit
<hi rend='italic'>in the ninth month</hi>, unnecessary after 9; 31, omit
<hi rend='italic'>their iniquity</hi>, for <hi rend='italic'>upon them</hi> read
<hi rend='italic'>upon him</hi>, and for <hi rend='italic'>men</hi> read
<hi rend='italic'>land, of Judah</hi>; 32, for <hi rend='italic'>Jeremiah took</hi>
read <hi rend='italic'>Baruch took</hi> and omit <hi rend='italic'>and gave it to
Baruch the scribe the son of Neriah</hi>, and also the words <hi rend='italic'>king
of Judah</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>in the fire</hi>.</note> and
of the consequences&mdash;the communication
of the Roll to the princes and by them to
the king, the king's burning of the Roll piece by
piece as he heard it read, his order for the arrest
of Jeremiah and Baruch, their escape into hiding,
and their preparation of a Second Roll containing
all the words of the First with many others like
them. We may now, in addition, note the following.
</p>

<p>
First there is the Divine Peradventure at the
beginning of the story.<note place='foot'>xxxvi. 3.</note>
<hi rend='italic'>It may be</hi>, God says,
that the people will hear and turn from their evil
ways that I may forgive their iniquity&mdash;a very
significant <hi rend='italic'>perhaps</hi> when taken with the Parable
of the Potter to which we are coming. Again,
the king at least understands the evil predicted
<pb n='179'/><anchor id='Pg179'/>
by Jeremiah to be the destruction of his land and
people by the King of Babylon.<note place='foot'>xxxvi. 29;
cp. xxv. 9 f.</note> And again,
though some of the princes encourage the
Prophet's escape, and urge the king not to burn
the Roll, none are shocked by the burning.<note place='foot'>xxxvi. 19, 24.</note>
Evidently in 605-4 they were not so impressed
with the divinity of Jeremiah's word as they had
been in 608. Then they did not speak of telling
the king; now they say that they <hi rend='italic'>must
tell</hi><note place='foot'>Such is the force of the Hebrew idiom in the last clause of
xxxvi. 16; for the different attitude of the princes in 608 see
pp. 170 ff.</note> him.
Jehoiakim's malignant influence has grown, and
Jeremiah discovers the inconstancy of the princes,
even of some friendly to himself.
</p>

<p>
To the same decisive year, 605-4, <hi rend='italic'>the fourth of
Jehoiakim</hi>, is referred an address by Jeremiah reported
in XXV. 1-11 (with perhaps 13<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>). This
repeats the Prophet's charge that his people have
refused&mdash;now for three-and-twenty years&mdash;to
listen to his call for repentance and reaffirms
the certainty, at last made clear by the Battle of
Carchemish, that their deserved doom lies in the
hands of a Northern Power, which shall waste
their land and carry them into foreign servitude
for seventy years. The suggestion that this
address formed the conclusion of the Second
Roll dictated by Jeremiah to Baruch is suitable
to the contents of the address and becomes more
<pb n='180'/><anchor id='Pg180'/>
probable if we take as genuine the words in 13<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Thus will I bring upon that land all My words which
I have spoken against her, all that is written in this
Book</hi>. But a curious question rises from the fact
that we have two differing reports of the address.<note place='foot'>The Hebrew text
is accurately rendered by our English Versions; the following are the principal points
on which the Greek differs from it: Verse 1, both Greek and Latin lack
<hi rend='italic'>that was the first year of Nebuchadrezzar, king of Babylon</hi>; in
verse 2 Greek lacks <hi rend='italic'>Jeremiah the prophet</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>all</hi>, and in verse 3 <hi rend='italic'>the word of the Lord
hath come to me</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>but ye have not hearkened</hi>. In verse 6
for  <hi rend='italic'>I will do you no hurt</hi> Greek reads <hi rend='italic'>to your
hurt</hi>. Again, Greek lacks in 7 <hi rend='italic'>saith the Lord</hi>, in
8 <hi rend='italic'>of Hosts</hi>, in 9 <hi rend='italic'>saith the Lord and to
Nebuchadrezzar the king of Babylon My servant</hi>, and for <hi rend='italic'>all
the families</hi> it reads <hi rend='italic'>a family</hi>; and in 11 lacks
<hi rend='italic'>this, a desolation, these</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>the
king of Babylon</hi>, substituting for the last two <hi rend='italic'>shall serve
among the nations</hi>.</note>
Very significantly the shorter Greek
Version contains neither the addition to the date,
<hi rend='italic'>that was the first year of Nebuchadrezzar, king of
Babylon</hi>, nor the two statements that his was the
Northern Power which would waste Judah and
which she should serve for seventy years (verses
1, 9, 11, as also the similar reference in verse 12),
all of which are inserted in the Hebrew text but
not without a sign of their being later intrusions
upon it.<note place='foot'>E.g. the preposition <hi rend='italic'>to</hi>
before <hi rend='italic'>Nebuchadrezzar</hi> in verse 9
which does not construe.</note> And indeed it is inconceivable that the
Greek translator could have omitted the four
references to Nebuchadrezzar (including that in
<pb n='181'/><anchor id='Pg181'/>
verse 12) had he found them in the Hebrew text
from which he worked. Probably, therefore,
Jeremiah did not include them in the first version
of his address; and for this he had reason. His
purpose in the address was to declare the fulfilment
of the substance of all his previous prophesying,
and this had been not that the Chaldeans,
but that <hi rend='italic'>a northern power</hi>, would prove to be
the executioner of God's judgment upon Judah.
The references to Nebuchadrezzar were added,
possibly by Jeremiah himself or by Baruch, as
the Chaldean doom steadily drew nearer. The
interesting thing is that the earlier version of
the address survived and was used by the Greek
translator.<note place='foot'>xxv. 1-14 has been denied to Jeremiah by Schwally
(<q>Z.A.T.W.,</q> viii. 177 ff.) and Duhm, but their arguments are
answered by Giesebrecht and Cornill <hi rend='italic'>in loco</hi>; see, too, Gillies,
195-8, 202, and Skinner, 240 f.</note>
</p>

<p>
Verses 12-14, indicating the destruction of
Babylon in her turn after seventy years, are, in
whole or in part, generally taken as a post-exilic
addition.<note place='foot'>See Davidson in Hastings' <q>D.B.,</q> ii. 574,
Driver and Gillies <hi rend='italic'>in loco</hi>.</note> Omitting verse 14, the
Greek inserts between 13 and 15 the Oracles on Foreign
Nations, which the Hebrew postpones to Chs.
XLVI. ff.<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target="Pg014">14</ref>.</note>
In the uncertain state of the text of
12-14 it is impossible to decide whether this was
or was not the original position of those Oracles.
</p>

<pb n='182'/><anchor id='Pg182'/>

<p>
The rest of the chapter, verses 15-38, is so full
of expansions and repetitions, which we may
partly see from a comparison of it with the
Greek, as well as of inconsistencies with some
earlier Oracles by Jeremiah,<note place='foot'>E.g. cp.
26 with 9 and both with i. 15.</note> of traces of the later
prophetic style and of echoes of other prophets,
that many deny any part of the miscellany to
be Jeremiah's own. Yet we must remember that
his commission was not to Judah alone<note place='foot'>As Duhm asserts;
see above, pp. <ref target="Pg079">79</ref> ff.</note> but to
<hi rend='italic'>the nations</hi> as well, against many of which XXV.
15-38 is directed; and the figure of the Lord
handing to the Prophet the cup of the wine of
His wrath is not one which we have any reason
to doubt to be Jeremiah's. Sifting, by help of
the Greek, the Hebrew list of nations who are to
drink of the cup, we get Judah and Egypt;
Askalon, Gaza, Ekron, and the remnant of Ashdod;
Dedan, Tema, Buz, and their <hi rend='italic'>clipt</hi> neighbours
in Arabia; all of whom were shaken in
Jeremiah's day by the Chaldean terror. Indeed
the reference to Ashdod suits the condition of
that Philistine city in the Prophet's time better
than its restored prosperity in the post-exilic
age. The substance of verses 15-23 may therefore
be reasonably left to Jeremiah. Verses
24-38 are more doubtful.<note place='foot'>The above paragraph on
xxv. 15-38 is based on Giesebrecht's
careful analysis of the passage.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='183'/><anchor id='Pg183'/>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<head>2. Parables. (XIII, XVIII-XX, XXXV.)</head>

<p>
To the reign of Jehoiakim are usually referred
a number of symbolic actions by Jeremiah, the
narratives of which carry no dates. So far as
they imply that the Prophet was still able to
move openly about Jerusalem and the country
they might be regarded as earlier than 604, when
he was under restraint and had to hide himself.<note place='foot'>xxxvi.
5, 19, 26.</note>
But this is not certain. We are left to take them
in the order in which they occur in the Book.
</p>

<p>
The first is that of the waist-cloth, XIII. 1-11.
Jeremiah was charged to buy a linen waist-cloth<note place='foot'>Worn next the skin;
not <hi rend='italic'>girdle</hi> which came over the other
garments. See <q>Enc. Bibl.,</q> article <q>Girdle.</q></note>
and after wearing it, but keeping it from damp,
to bury it in the cleft of a rock, and after many
days to dig it up, when he found it rotting. So
had the Lord taken Israel to cleave to Him as
such a cloth <hi rend='italic'>cleaves to the loins of a man</hi>; but
separated from Him they had likewise rotted and
were good for nothing. Separated by what&mdash;God's
action or their own? As it stands the
interpretation is complicated. God spoils Israel
because of their pride (verse 9) and Israel spoil
themselves by disobedience and idolatry (verse 10).
The complication may be due to a later addition
to the text. But this question is not serious.
<pb n='184'/><anchor id='Pg184'/>
Neither is that of the place where Jeremiah is
said to have buried the cloth. <hi rend='italic'>Pĕrath</hi>, the spelling
in the text, is the Hebrew name for the Euphrates
and so the Greek and our own versions render
it. But the name has not its usual addition of
The River. If the Euphrates be intended the
story is hardly one of fact, but rather a vivid
parable of the saturation of the national life by
heathen, corruptive influences from Mesopotamia.<note place='foot'>So virtually
Cornill, who, indifferent as to whether the
story is one of fact or of imagination, emphasises the choice of
the Euphrates as its essential point, compares ii. 18, <hi rend='italic'>to drink of
the waters of the River</hi>, and dates the story in the earliest years
of Jeremiah's ministry. On the other hand Erbt, who also reads
<hi rend='italic'>Euphrates</hi>, interprets the story as one of actual journeys thither
by Jeremiah.</note>
Yet within an hour from Anathoth lies the Wady
Farah, a name which corresponds to the Hebrew
<hi rend='italic'>Pĕrath</hi> or (by a slight change)
<hi rend='italic'>Parah</hi>; and the
Wady, familiar as it must have been to Jeremiah,
suits the picture, having a lavish fountain, a broad
pool and a stream, all of which soak into the sand
and fissured rock of the surrounding desert.<note place='foot'>I visited it in 1901
and 1904, a most surprising oasis!</note>
That the Wady Farah was the scene of the
parable is therefore possible, though not certain.<note place='foot'>Pĕrath or
Parah = Farah was first suggested by
Ewald (<q>Prophets of the O. T.,</q> Eng. trans, iii. 152), quoting
Schick (<q>Ausland,</q> 1867, 572-4), by Birch (<q>P.E.F.Q.,</q> 1880,
235), and by Marti (<q>Z.D.P.V.,</q> 1880, 11), and has been accepted
by many&mdash;Cheyne, Ball, McFadyen, Peake, etc.</note>
<pb n='185'/><anchor id='Pg185'/>
But the ambiguity of these details does not interfere
with the moral of the whole.
</p>

<p>
This parable is immediately followed by the
ironic metaphor of the Jars Full of Wine, XIII.
12-14, which I have already quoted.<note place='foot'>See above, p.
<ref target="Pg055">55</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
Next comes the Parable of the Potter, Ch.
XVIII, that might be from any part of the
Prophet's ministry, during which he was free
to move in public. This parable is instructive
first by disclosing one of the ways along which
Revelation reached, and spelt itself out in, the mind
of the Prophet. He felt a Divine impulse to go
down to the house of the Potter,<note place='foot'>In the valley of Hinnom, where
were potteries and above them a city-gate <hi rend='italic'>Harsith</hi> =
(probably) <hi rend='italic'>Potsherds</hi>; in the upper valley
broken pottery is still crushed for cement; lower down
traces of ancient potteries appear, and there is the traditional
site of the Potter's Field, Matt. xxvii. 7.</note> <hi rend='italic'>and there I will
cause thee to hear My Words</hi>, obviously not words
spoken to the outward ear. For, as Jeremiah
watched the potter at work on <hi rend='italic'>his two
stones</hi>,<note place='foot'>So literally the term rendered
<hi rend='italic'>wheel</hi>, A.V. It was of two
discs, originally of stone, but later of wood, of which in earlier
times the upper alone revolved and the lower and larger was
stationary, but later both revolved by the potter's foot. See
<q>Enc. Bibl.,</q> article <q>Pottery.</q></note>
and saw that when the vessel he first attempted
was marred he would remould the clay into
another vessel as seemed good to him, a fresh
conception of the Divine Method with men broke
<pb n='186'/><anchor id='Pg186'/>
upon Jeremiah and became articulate. A word
from the Lord flashed through his eyes upon his
mind, just as in his first visions of the almond-blossom
and the caldron.<note place='foot'>See above, pp. <ref target="Pg084">84</ref>
f.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
XVIII. 5. Then the Word of the Lord came unto
me, saying, [6] O House of Israel, cannot I do
with you as this potter?<note place='foot'>Hebrew adds <hi rend='italic'>Rede of the
Lord</hi>.</note> Behold, as the clay
in the hand of the potter, so are ye in My
hand.<note place='foot'>Hebrew adds <hi rend='italic'>House of Israel</hi>.</note>
</quote>

<p>
Thus by figure and by word the Divine
Sovereignty was proclaimed as absolutely as
possible. But the Sovereignty is a real Sovereignty
and therefore includes Freedom. It is
not fettered by its own previous decrees, as some
rigorous doctrines of predestination insist, but is
free to recall and alter these, should the human
characters and wills with which it works in
history themselves change. There is a Divine
as well as a human Free-will. <q>God's dealing
with men is moral; He treats them as their
moral conduct permits Him to do.</q><note place='foot'>A. B. Davidson.</note>
</p>

<p>
The Predestination of men or nations, which
the Prophet sees figured in the work of the potter,
is to Service. This is clear from the comparison
between Israel and a vessel designed for a definite
use. It recalls Jeremiah's similar conception of
<pb n='187'/><anchor id='Pg187'/>
his own predestination, which was not to a
certain state, of life or death, but to the office of
speaker for God to the nations. Yet because the
acceptance or rejection by a nation or an individual
of the particular service, for which God
has destined them, naturally determines their
ultimate fate, therefore this wider sense, which
predestination came to have in Christian doctrine,
is so far also involved in the parable.<note place='foot'>To this we return in
dealing with Jeremiah's religious experience. See below,
<ref target="Lecture_VII">Lecture vii</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
To the truths of the Divine Sovereignty and
the Divine Freedom the parable adds that of
the Divine Patience. The potter of Hinnom
does not impatiently cast upon the rubbish which
abounds there the lump of clay that has proved
refractory to his design for it. He gives the
lump another trial upon another design. If, as
many think, the verses which follow the parable,
7-10, are not by Jeremiah himself (though this is
far from proved, as we shall see) then he does not
explicitly draw from the potter's patience with
the clay the inference of the Divine patience with
men. But the inference is implicit in the parable.
Did Jeremiah intend it? If he did, this is proof
that in spite of his people's obstinacy under the
hand of God, he cherished, though he dared not
yet utter, the hope that God would have some
fresh purpose for their service beyond the wreck
<pb n='188'/><anchor id='Pg188'/>
they were making of His former designs for them
and the ruin they were thereby bringing on
themselves&mdash;that He would grant them still
another chance of rising to His will. But if
Jeremiah did not intend this inference from his
parable then we may claim the parable as one
more example of that of which we have already
had several, the power of this wonderful man's
experience and doctrine to start in other minds
ideas and beliefs of which he himself was not
conscious, or which at least he did not articulate&mdash;that
power which after all is his highest
distinction as a prophet. I do not think, however,
that we can deny to Jeremiah all consciousness
of what his parable implies in regard to the
Patience of the Divine Potter with the perverse
human clay in His hands. For we have already
seen from another of the Prophet's metaphors
that under the abused and rank surface of a
nation's or an individual's life he was sure of soil
which by deeper ploughing would yet yield fruits
meet for repentance.<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target="Pg109">109</ref>
on iv. 3.</note>
</p>

<p>
In either case the parable is rich in Gospel for
ourselves. If we have failed our God upon His
first designs for us and for our service do not let
us despair. He is patient and ready to give us
another trial under His hand. And this not only
is the lesson of more than one of our Lord's
parables, for instance that of the fig-tree found
<pb n='189'/><anchor id='Pg189'/>
fruitless, but nevertheless given the chance of
another year,<note place='foot'>Luke xiii. 6 ff. Other parables or actual incidents
illustrating either the possibilities of characters commonly deemed
hopeless or the fresh chances given them by God's grace, are
found in Matt. xviii. 23 f., Luke vii. 39 f. (the woman who was a
sinner) and xix. (Zacchæus).</note> and the motive of His hopes for the
publicans and harlots, but is implied by all the
Gospel of His life and death for sinners. In these
He saw still possibilities worth His dying for.
</p>

<p>
But as Christ Himself taught, there are, and
ethically must be, limits to the Divine Patience
with men. Of these the men of Judah and
Jerusalem are warned in the verses which follow
the parable. While it is true (verse 7 ff.) that if
a nation, which God has said He will destroy, turn
from its evil, He will relent, the converse is
equally true of a nation which He has promised
to plant and build, that if it do wrong and obey
not He will surely repent of the good He had
planned for it. For this refractory people of
Judah He is already <hi rend='italic'>framing</hi> or <hi rend='italic'>moulding
evil</hi>&mdash;the verb used is that of which the Hebrew name for
<hi rend='italic'>potter</hi> is the participle. Though chosen of God
and shaped by His hands for high service Israel's
destiny is not irrevocable; nay, their doom is
already being shaped. Yet He makes still another
appeal to them to repent and amend their ways.
To this they answer: <hi rend='italic'>No use! we will walk after
our own devices and carry out every one the stubbornness
<pb n='190'/><anchor id='Pg190'/>
of his evil heart.</hi> At least that is how Jeremiah
interprets their temper; his people had hardened
since Megiddo and the accession of Jehoiakim.
</p>

<p>
Some moderns have denied these verses to
Jeremiah and taken them as the addition of a later
hand and without relevance to the parable. With
all respect to the authority of those critics,<note place='foot'>Cornill
<hi rend='italic'>in loco</hi>, Skinner, pp. 162 f., both of them in fine
passages on the teaching of the parable, the former exposing
the superficiality of Duhm's impulsive judgment upon it. Cornill
finds that the genuine words of Jeremiah close with verse 4;
Skinner, Erbt and Gillies (p. 158) continue them to 6.</note> I find
myself unable to agree with them. They differ
as to where the authentic words of the Prophet
cease, some concluding these with verse 4 others
with verse 6. In either case the parable is left
in the air, without such practical application of
his truths as Jeremiah usually makes to Judah or
other nations. Nor can the relevance of the
verses be denied, as Cornill, one of their rejectors,
admits. Nor does the language bear traces of
a later date. They seem to me to stand as
Jeremiah's own.
</p>

<p>
The Prophet's threat of evil is still so vague,
that, with due acknowledgment of the uncertainty
of such points, we may suppose it, along with the
Parable of the Potter, to have been uttered before
the Battle of Carchemish, when the Babylonian
sovereignty over Western Asia became assured.<note place='foot'>But see
<ref target="Pg191">next page</ref>.</note>
</p>

<pb n='191'/><anchor id='Pg191'/>

<p>
The next in order of Jeremiah's symbols, Ch.
XIX, the breaking of a potter's jar past restoration,
with his repetition of doom upon Judah, led
to his arrest, Ch. XX, and this at last to his
definite statement that the doom would be captivity
to the King of Babylon. Some therefore
date the episode after Carchemish, but this is
uncertain; Jeremiah is still not under restraint
nor in hiding.
</p>

<p>
He is charged to buy an earthen jar and take
with him some of the elders of the people and of
the priests to the Potsherd Gate in the Valley of
Hinnom.<note place='foot'>xix. 1 ff. The Greek connects this incident with the
preceding by reading <hi rend='italic'>then</hi> for the Hebrew
<hi rend='italic'>thus</hi>, and with many Hebrew MSS. adds to <hi rend='italic'>saith
the Lord</hi> the phrase <hi rend='italic'>to me</hi>, making Jeremiah himself
the narrator. In xix. 4 read with Greek <hi rend='italic'>whom neither they
nor their fathers knew, and the kings of Judah have filled</hi>, etc.
Throughout Greek lacks phrases which are probably later additions
to Hebrew; but these are not important.</note> There, after predicting the evils which
the Lord shall bring on the city because of her
idolatry and her sacrifice of children in that Valley
down which they were looking from this gate, he
broke the jar and flung it upon the heaps of
shattered earthenware from which the gate
derived its name;<note place='foot'>See p. <ref target="Pg185">185</ref>,
n. 2.</note> and returning to the Temple
repeated the Lord's doom upon Judah and
Jerusalem. He was heard by Pashḥur of the
priestly guild of Immer, who appears to have
<pb n='192'/><anchor id='Pg192'/>
been chief of the Temple police, and after being
<hi rend='italic'>smitten</hi> was put in the stocks, but the next day
released, probably rather because his friends
among the princes had prevailed in his favour
than because the mind of Pashḥur had meantime
changed. For Jeremiah on his release immediately
faced his captor with these words:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
XX. 3. The Lord hath called thy name not
Pashḥur but Magor-Missabib, Terror-all-round.
4. For thus saith the Lord, Lo, I will
make thee a terror to thyself and all thy
friends, and they shall fall by the sword
of their foes, and thine own eyes shall be
seeing it; and all Judah shall I give into the
hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall
carry them to exile and smite them with
the sword ... 6. And thou Pashḥur and all that
dwell in thy house shall go into captivity and
in Babylon thou shalt die.<note place='foot'>The above is mainly from the Greek. The
following is a significant instance of how the knowledge of the Bible still holds
among some at least of the Scottish peasantry. A woman in
a rural parish calling on her minister to complain about the
harshness of the factor of the landlord said that he was a very
Magor-Missabib. And it is no less significant that the minister
had to consult his concordance to the Bible to know what she
meant!</note>
</quote>

<p>
At last Jeremiah definitely states what Judah's
doom from the North is to be. We wish that we
knew the date of this utterance.
</p>

<p>
Assigned by its title to <hi rend='italic'>the days of Jehoiakim</hi> is
<pb n='193'/><anchor id='Pg193'/>
another action of the Prophet, which is the
exhibition rather of an example than of a symbol,
Ch. XXXV. The story was probably dictated by
Jeremiah to Baruch, for while the Hebrew text
opens it in the first person (2-5), the Greek version
carries the first person throughout and the later
change by the Hebrew to the third person (12
and 18) may easily have been due to a copyist
mistaking the first personal suffix for the initial
letter of the name Jeremiah.<note place='foot'>In xxxv the differences between Greek
and Hebrew continue to be those generally found in the Book, i.e. Greek omits the
expansive formulas, including the Divine titles, redundant words (like
<hi rend='italic'>all</hi>) and phrases, and corrects the wrong preposition
<hi rend='italic'>to</hi> by the right <hi rend='italic'>upon</hi> (17). Further, it
spells differently some of the proper names, reads <hi rend='italic'>house</hi> for
<hi rend='italic'>chamber</hi> (4 <hi rend='italic'>bis</hi>), <hi rend='italic'>a
bowl</hi> for <hi rend='italic'>bowls</hi> (5), <hi rend='italic'>to me</hi> for
<hi rend='italic'>to Jeremiah</hi> (12), and in 18 does not address the promise to
the Rechabites, but utters it of them in the third person, also omitting the name of
Jeremiah, and in 19 for <hi rend='italic'>for ever</hi>, lit. <hi rend='italic'>all
the days</hi>, reads <hi rend='italic'>all the days of the land</hi>.</note>
</p>

<p>
The Rechabites, a tent-dwelling tribe sojourning
within the borders, and worshipping the God,
of Israel, had taken refuge from the Chaldean
invasion within the walls of Jerusalem. Knowing
their fidelity to their ancestral habits Jeremiah
invited some of them to one of the Temple
chambers and offered them wine. They refused,
for they said that their ancestor Jehonadab ben-Rechab<note place='foot'>The ally of
Jehu, II. Kings x. 15, 23. The tribe was Kenite,
I. Chron. ii. 55. The Kenites, according to Jud. i. 16, I.
Sam. xv. 6, settled in the South of Judah, but Jonadab is found
in North Israel and apparently his descendants, as fugitives before
an invasion from the North, came from the same quarter. Heber
the Kenite also dwelt on Esdraelon, Jud. iv. 17, v. 24.</note>
had charged them to drink no wine,
<pb n='194'/><anchor id='Pg194'/>
neither to build houses, nor sow seed nor plant
vineyards. Whereupon Jeremiah went forth and
held them up as an example to the men of Judah,
not because of any of the particular forms of
their abstinence, but because of their constancy.
Here were people who remembered, and through
centuries had remained loyal to, the precepts of
an ancestor; while Israel had fallen from their
ancient faithfulness to their God and ignored His
commandments. The steadfast loyalty of these
simple nomads to the institutions of a far-away
human father, how it put to shame Judah's
delinquency from the commands of her Divine
Father! This contrast is in line with the others,
which we have seen Jeremiah emphasising,
between his people's fickleness towards God and
the obdurate adherence of the Gentiles to their
national gods, or the constancy of the processes
of nature: the birds that know the seasons of their
coming, the unfailing snows of Lebanon and the
streams of the hills. The whole story is characteristic
of Jeremiah's teaching.<note place='foot'>Duhm's criticisms of it, and rejection of
some of its parts are, even for him, unusually arbitrary, especially his objection
to the words in verse 13, <hi rend='italic'>Go and say to the men of Judah and the
inhabitants of Jerusalem</hi>, for obviously these people were not
gathered in, nor could be addressed from, the Temple chamber.
It was the people as a whole, whose fickleness from age to age
he was about to condemn; on this verse Duhm's remarks are,
besides being arbitrary, inconsistent.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='195'/><anchor id='Pg195'/>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<head>3. Oracles on the Edge of Doom. (VII. 16-XVIII <hi rend='italic'>passim</hi>,
XXII, XLV.)</head>

<p>
From the seventh to the tenth chapters of the
Book of Jeremiah there are a number of undated
passages in prose and in verse, which are generally
held to have been included in the collection of
the Prophet's Oracles written out by Baruch in
604-3, and of which some may have been delivered
during the reign of Josiah, but the most of
them more probably either upon its tragic close
at Megiddo in 608, or under Jehoiakim. We have
already considered the addresses reported in
VII. 1-15, 21-27,<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target="Pg147">147</ref>
ff.</note> as well as the metrical fragments
VII. 28, 29, and VIII. 8, 9.<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target="Pg050">50</ref>,
<ref target="Pg153">153</ref> f.</note> There are other
prose passages describing (1) VII. 16-20, the
worship of the Queen, or the Host, of Heaven,
which had been imposed upon Jerusalem by the
Assyrians, and either survived the decay of their
power from 625 onwards, or if suppressed by
Josiah in obedience to Deuteronomy,<note place='foot'>Deut. iv. 19, xvii. 3; II.
Kings xxiii. 5, 13. See the present writer's <q>Jerusalem,</q> ii., pp. 186 ff.,
260, 263.</note> had been
revived under Jehoiakim; (2) VII. 30-34, the high-places
in Topheth, upon which children were
sacrificed, also condemned by Deuteronomy and
<pb n='196'/><anchor id='Pg196'/>
recorded as destroyed by Josiah;<note place='foot'>Deut. xii. 31, II. Kings xxiii. 10.
See <q>Jerusalem,</q> ii., pp. 263 f.</note> (3) VIII. 1-3,
the desecration of the graves of Jerusalem. It is
not necessary to reproduce these prose passages,
whether they be Jeremiah's or not; our versions
of them, Authorised and Revised, are sufficiently
clear.
</p>

<p>
But there follow, from VIII. 4 onwards, after
the usual introduction, a series of metrical Oracles
of which the following translation is offered in
observance of the irregularity of the measures of
the original. Note how throughout the Prophet
is, as before, testing his false people&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>heeding</hi>
and <hi rend='italic'>listening</hi> are his words&mdash;finding no proof of a
genuine repentance and bewailing the doom that
therefore must fall upon them. Some of his
earlier verses are repeated, and there is the
reference to the Law, VIII. 8 f., which we have
discussed.<note place='foot'>Pp. <ref target="Pg153">153</ref> f.</note>
There is also a hint of exile&mdash;which,
however, is still future.
</p>

<p>
In Ch. VIII, verses 4-12 (including the repetitions
they contain) seem a unity; verse 13
stands by itself (unless it goes with the preceding);
14, 15 echo one of the Scythian songs, but
the fear they reflect may be that either of an
Egyptian invasion after Megiddo or of a Chaldean;
16 and 17 are certainly of a northern invasion,
but whether the same as the preceding is doubtful;
<pb n='197'/><anchor id='Pg197'/>
and doubtful too is the connection of both
with the incomparable elegy which follows&mdash;VIII.
18-IX. 1. For IX. 1 undoubtedly belongs to this,
as the different division of the chapters in the
Hebrew text properly shows. In Ch. IX. 2-9
the Prophet is in another mood than that of the
preceding songs. There the miseries of his people
had oppressed him; here it is their sins. There
his heart had been with them and he had made
their sufferings his own; here he would flee from
them to a lodge in the desert.<note place='foot'>The only apparent reason for the
compiler putting the two songs together is that the last verse of the one and the first
verse of the other open in the same way, <hi rend='italic'>O that I had</hi> (Hebrew
<hi rend='italic'>O who would give me</hi>).</note> IX. 10-12, is
another separate dirge on the land, burned up
but whether by invaders or by drought is not
clear. Then 13-16 is a passage of prose. In
17-22 we have still another elegy with some of the
most haunting lines Jeremiah has given us, on
war or pestilence, or both. And there follow eight
lines, verses 23-24, on a very different, a spiritual,
theme, and then 25-26 another prose passage, on
the futility of physical circumcision if the heart be
not circumcised. If these be Jeremiah's, and there
is no sign in them to the contrary, they form
further evidence of his originality as a prophet.
</p>

<p>
The two Chs. VIII and IX are thus a collection
both of prose passages and poems out of
different circumstances and different moods, with
<pb n='198'/><anchor id='Pg198'/>
little order or visible connection. Are we to see
in them a number of those <hi rend='italic'>many like words</hi> which
Jeremiah, when he dictated his Second Roll to
Baruch, added to his Oracles on the First Roll?<note place='foot'>xxxvi. 32.</note>
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='stars: 5'/>

<p>
The first verses are in curious parallel to
Tchekov's remarkable plaint about his own people
and <q>the Russian disease</q> as he calls their failing:
<q>Why do we tire so soon? And when we fall
how is it that we never try to rise again?</q>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>And thou shalt say to them,<note place='foot'>Greek omits this clause.</note>
Thus saith the Lord:&nbsp;&nbsp;VIII. 4</l>
<l><q rend='pre'>Does any one fall and not get up,</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='post'>Or turn and not
return?</q><note place='foot'>Apparently a common proverb.</note></l>
<l>Why then are this people turning&nbsp;&nbsp;5</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Persistently turning<note place='foot'>Hebrew adds
<hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi> with no sense and a disturbance to
the metre.</note>?</l>
<l>They take fast hold of deceit,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Refuse to return.</l>
<l>I have been heeding, been listening&mdash;&nbsp;&nbsp;6</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>They speak but untruth!</l>
<l>Not a man repents of his evil,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Saying, <q>What have I done?</q></l>
<l>All of them swerve in their courses</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Like a plunging horse in the battle.</l>
<l>Even the stork in the heavens&nbsp;&nbsp;7</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Knoweth her seasons,</l>
<pb n='199'/><anchor id='Pg199'/>
<l>And dove and swift and swallow</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Keep time of their coming&mdash;</l>
<l>Only my people, they know not</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The Rule<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Mishpaṭ
= rule, order, ordinance.</hi></note> of the Lord.</l>
<l>How say ye, <q rend='pre'>We are the wise,</q>&nbsp;&nbsp;8</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='post'>With us is the
Law<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Torah = law</hi>, see p.
<ref target="Pg154">154</ref>.</note> of the Lord.</q></l>
<l>But, lo, into falsehood hath wrought it<note place='foot'>Reading צשה
with Dagesh in last letter.</note></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>False pen of the scribes.</l>
<l>Put to shame are the wise,&nbsp;&nbsp;9</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Dismayed and taken,</l>
<l>The Word of the Lord have they spurned&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>What wisdom is theirs?</l>
<l>So to others I give their wives,&nbsp;&nbsp;10</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their fields to who may take them,</l>
<l>For all from the least to the greatest</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On plunder are bent;</l>
<l>From the prophet on to the priest</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Everyone worketh lies.</l>
<l>They would heal the breach of my people&nbsp;&nbsp;11</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>As though it were trifling,</l>
<l>Saying <q>It is well, it is well!</q>&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And well it is not!</l>
<l>Were they shamed of the foulness they wrought?&nbsp;&nbsp;12</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Nay, shamed not at all,</l>
<l>Nor knew their dishonour!</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>So shall they fall with the falling,</l>
<pb n='200'/><anchor id='Pg200'/>
<l>Reel in the time of their reckoning,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Sayeth the Lord.<note place='foot'>With 10-12,
cp. vi. 13-15; 11, 12 are wanting in Greek.</note></l>
</lg>
<lg>
<l>Would I harvest them?&mdash;Rede of the Lord&mdash;&nbsp;&nbsp;13</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>No grapes on the vine,</l>
<l>And never a fig on the fig-tree,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Withered the leaves.<note place='foot'>Hebrew
adds a line of corrupt text.</note></l>
</lg>
<lg>
<l>For what sit we still?&nbsp;&nbsp;14</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Sweep together</l>
<l>And into the fortified cities,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>To perish.</l>
<l>For the Lord our own God</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Hath doomed us to perish,</l>
<l>Hath drugged us with waters of bale&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>To Him<note place='foot'>Hebrew,
<hi rend='italic'>the Lord</hi>.</note> have we sinned.</l>
</lg>
<lg>
<l>Hoping for peace?&nbsp;&nbsp;15</l>
<l>'Twas no good,</l>
<l>For a season of healing?</l>
<l>Lo, panic.<note place='foot'>So Greek. The verse is
another instance of the two-stresses-to-a-line
metre; see p. <ref target="Pg046">46</ref>.</note></l>
</lg>
<lg>
<l>From Dan the bruit<note place='foot'>So Greek.</note>
has been heard,&nbsp;&nbsp;16</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Hinnying of his horses,</l>
<l>With the noise of the neighing of his steeds</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The land is aquake.</l>
<pb n='201'/><anchor id='Pg201'/>
<l>He<note place='foot'>So Greek.</note> comes,<note place='foot'>So Greek.</note>
he devours the land and her fulness</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The city and her dwellers.</l>
<l>For behold, I am sending upon you&nbsp;&nbsp;17</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Basilisk-serpents,</l>
<l>Against whom availeth no charm,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>But they shall bite you.<note place='foot'>Hebrew adds
<hi rend='italic'>Rede of the Lord</hi>.</note></l>
</lg>
<lg>
<l>Ah! That my grief is past comfort<note place='foot'>After the Greek,
Hebrew is hopeless.</note>&nbsp;&nbsp;18</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Faints on me my heart,</l>
<l>Lo, hark to the cry of my people</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Wide o'er the land.<note place='foot'>Lit.,
<hi rend='italic'>from a land of distances</hi>, usually taken as meaning
exile. But exile is not yet. Duhm as above.</note></l>
<l><q rend='pre'>Is the Lord not in Ṣion,</q>&nbsp;&nbsp;19</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Is there no king?<note place='foot'>So Greek.</note></l>
<l>[Why have they vexed Me with idols,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Foreigners'
fancies?]<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Bubbles</hi>, ii. 5.
The couplet seems an intrusion breaking
between the two parts of the people's cry.</note></l>
<l><q rend='pre'>Harvest is past, summer is ended,</q>&nbsp;&nbsp;20</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='post'>And we are not saved!</q></l>
<l>For the breaking of the daughter of my people&nbsp;&nbsp;21</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>I break, I blacken!</l>
<l>Horror hath fastened upon me</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Pangs as of her that beareth.<note place='foot'>So
Greek.</note></l>
<l>Is there no balm in Gilead,&nbsp;&nbsp;22</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Is there no healer?</l>
<pb n='202'/><anchor id='Pg202'/>
<l>Why do the wounds never close<note place='foot'>Lit.,
<hi rend='italic'>why cometh not up the fresh skin on</hi>.</note></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Of the daughter of my people?</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Oh that my head were waters,&nbsp;&nbsp;IX. 1</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Mine eyes a fountain of tears,</l>
<l>That day and night I might weep</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>For the slain of my people!</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
There follows an Oracle in a very different mood.
In the previous one the Prophet has taken his
people to his heart, in spite of their sin and its
havoc; in this he repels and would be quit of them.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>O that I had in the desert&nbsp;&nbsp;2</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>A wayfarers'<note place='foot'>Greek,
<hi rend='italic'>an uttermost</hi>.</note> lodge!</l>
<l>Then would I leave my people,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And get away from them,</l>
<l>For adulterers all they be,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>A bundle<note place='foot'>The Hebrew word
seems to me to be taken here rather in its primitive
sense of <hi rend='italic'>bundle</hi> than in the later, official meaning of
<hi rend='italic'>assembly</hi>.</note> of traitors!</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their tongue they stretch&nbsp;&nbsp;3</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Like a treacherous bow,(?)</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And never for truth</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Use their power in the land,</l>
<l>But from evil to evil go forth</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And Me they know not.<note place='foot'>Hebrew adds
<hi rend='italic'>Rede of the Lord</hi> for till now the Prophet has
spoken. Verse 3 is difficult. Duhm omits most, Cornill all, as
breaking the metrical schemes which they think Jeremiah invariably
used. But the form of the Hebrew text&mdash;short lines of two
beats each, with one longer line&mdash;is one into which Jeremiah sometimes
falls (see pp. <ref target="Pg046">46</ref> f.). <hi rend='italic'>Like a bow</hi>
so Greek; Hebrew, <hi rend='italic'>their
bow</hi>. Cp. our <hi rend='italic'>draw a long bow</hi> (Ball).</note></l>
<pb n='203'/><anchor id='Pg203'/>
<l>Be on guard with your friends,&nbsp;&nbsp;4</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Trust not your<note place='foot'>So Syriac.</note> brothers,</l>
<l>For brothers are all very Jacobs,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And friends gad about to defame.</l>
<l>Every one cheateth his neighbour,&nbsp;&nbsp;5</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>They cannot speak truth.</l>
<l>Their tongues they have trained to falsehood,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>They strain to be naughty&mdash;</l>
<l>Wrong upon wrong, deceit on deceit(?)&nbsp;&nbsp;6</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Refusing to know Me.<note place='foot'>Again Hebrew
adds <hi rend='italic'>Rede of the Lord</hi>. The text is uncertain.
Hebrew, <hi rend='italic'>thy dwelling is in the midst of deceit, they refuse to know
Me</hi>.</note></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Therefore thus saith the Lord:<note place='foot'>Hebrew
adds <hi rend='italic'>of Hosts</hi>.</note>&nbsp;&nbsp;7</l>
<l>Lo, I will smelt them, will test them.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>How else should I do</l>
<l>In face of the evil ...<note place='foot'>So Greek,
Hebrew omits; more seems to have dropped out.</note>(?)</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Of the Daughter of My people?</l>
<l>A deadly<note place='foot'>So Hebrew text; Hebrew margin and
Greek <hi rend='italic'>polished</hi>.</note> shaft is their tongue&nbsp;&nbsp;8</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The words of their mouth<note place='foot'>So Greek.</note>
deceit;</l>
<l>If peace any speak to his friend</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>In his heart he lays ambush.</l>
<pb n='204'/><anchor id='Pg204'/>
<l>Shall I not visit for such&mdash;&nbsp;&nbsp;9</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Rede of the Lord&mdash;</l>
<l>Nor on a nation like this</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Myself take vengeance?</l>
</lg>
<lg>
<l>Raise for the mountains a wail,<note place='foot'>So Greek. Hebrew,
<hi rend='italic'>I will raise</hi> and adds
<hi rend='italic'>lamentation</hi>.</note>&nbsp;&nbsp;10</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>For the meads of the pasture a dirge!</l>
<l>They are waste, with never a man<note place='foot'>Hebrew adds
<hi rend='italic'>passing over</hi>, probably a mistaken transference
from verse 12. Greek and Latin omit.</note></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Nor hear the lowing of cattle.</l>
<l>From the birds of heaven to the beasts</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>They have fled, they are gone.</l>
<l>I will make Jerusalem heaps,&nbsp;&nbsp;11</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Of jackals the lair,</l>
<l>And the townships of Judah lay waste,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>With never a dweller.</l>
<l>Who is the man that is wise&nbsp;&nbsp;12</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>To lay this to mind,</l>
<l>As the mouth of the Lord hath told him,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>So to declare&mdash;</l>
<l>The wherefore the country is perished,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And waste as the desert,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>With none to pass over!</l>
</lg>
<p>
13. And the Lord said unto me,<note place='foot'>So Greek.</note> Because they
forsook My Law which I set before them,
and hearkened not to My Voice,<note place='foot'>Hebrew uselessly adds
<hi rend='italic'>nor walked therein</hi>.</note> [14] but have
<pb n='205'/><anchor id='Pg205'/>
walked after the stubbornness of their heart,
and after the Baals, as their fathers taught
them. 15. Therefore thus saith the Lord<note place='foot'>Hebrew adds
<hi rend='italic'>of hosts</hi>; and <hi rend='italic'>this people</hi> for
<hi rend='italic'>them</hi>.</note> the God
of Israel, Behold I will give them wormwood
to eat and the waters of poison to drink. 16. And
I will scatter them among the nations, whom
neither they nor their fathers knew, and send
after them the sword till I have consumed
them.
</p>
<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Thus saith the Lord:&nbsp;&nbsp;17</l>
<l>Call the keening women to come,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And send for the wise ones,</l>
<l>That they come and make haste<note place='foot'>Hebrew adds
<hi rend='italic'>of Hosts</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>consider ye</hi> which Greek
omits as well as <hi rend='italic'>hasten</hi> in 18; the text of the four lines
is uncertain. For <hi rend='italic'>us</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>our</hi> Greek
has <hi rend='italic'>you</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>your</hi>.</note>&nbsp;&nbsp;18</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>To lift us a dirge,</l>
<l>Till with tears our eyes run down,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Our eyelids with water.</l>
<l>For hark! from Ṣion the voice of wailing,&nbsp;&nbsp;19</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='pre'>How we are undone!</q></l>
<l><q rend='pre'>Sore abashed we, land who have left,</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='post'>Our homes overthrown!</q><note place='foot'>So
Vulgate.</note></l>
</lg>
<lg>
<l>Hear, O women, the saying of the Lord,&nbsp;&nbsp;20</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Your ears take in the word of His mouth,</l>
<l>Teach the lament to your daughters</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Each to her comrade the dirge:</l>
<pb n='206'/><anchor id='Pg206'/>
<l><q rend='pre'>For Death has come up by our windows</q>&nbsp;&nbsp;21</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And into our palaces,</l>
<l>Cutting off from the streets the children</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The youths from the places;<note place='foot'>Hebrew
has the obvious intrusion, <hi rend='italic'>Speak thus, Rede of the
Lord</hi>, which Greek lacks.</note></l>
<l>And the corpses of men are fallen&nbsp;&nbsp;22</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>As dung on the field,</l>
<l>As sheaves left after the reaper</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='post'>And nobody gathers!</q></l>
</lg>
<lg>
<l>Thus saith the Lord:&nbsp;&nbsp;23</l>
<l>Boast not the wise in his wisdom,</l>
<l>Boast not the strong in his strength,</l>
<l>Boast not the rich in his riches,</l>
<l>But he that would boast in this let him boast,&nbsp;&nbsp;24</l>
<l>Insight and knowledge of Me,</l>
<l>That I am the Lord, who work troth,</l>
<l>Judgment and justice on earth,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>For in these I delight.</l>
</lg>
<p>
25. Behold, the days are coming&mdash;Rede of the
Lord&mdash;that I shall visit on everyone circumcised
as to the foreskin. 26. Egypt and Judah and
Edom, the sons of Ammon and Moab, and
all with the corner<note place='foot'>I.e. of their
hair; see xxv. 23, xlix. 32. Herodotus says
(iii. 8) that some Arabs shaved the hair above their temples; forbidden
to Jews, Lev. xix. 27.</note> clipt, who dwell in the
desert; for all the nations are uncircumcised
in their heart and all the house of Israel.
</p>
</quote>

<pb n='207'/><anchor id='Pg207'/>

<p>
Which just means that Israel, circumcised in the
flesh but not in the spirit, are as bad as the heathen
who share with them bodily circumcision.
</p>

<p>
Ch. X. 1-16 is a spirited, ironic poem on the
follies of idolatry which bears both in style and
substance marks of the later exile.
</p>

<p>
On the other hand X. 17-23 is a small collection
of short Oracles in metre, which there is no reason
to deny to Jeremiah. The text of the first, verses
17-18, is uncertain. If with the help of the Greek
we render it as follows it implies not an actual,
but an inevitable and possibly imminent, siege of
Jerusalem. The couplet in 17 may alone be
original and 18, the text of which is reducible
neither to metre nor wholly to sense, a prose note
upon it.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Sweep in thy wares from beyond,<note place='foot'>So Greek; Hebrew,
<hi rend='italic'>the land</hi>. The Hebrew part. <hi rend='italic'>sitting</hi>
may like that in v. 18 be future.</note>&nbsp;&nbsp;X. 17</l>
<l>In siege that shalt sit!</l>
</lg>
<p>
18. For thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will sling
out them that dwell in this land,<note place='foot'>So Greek; Hebrew,
<hi rend='italic'>in the land at this time</hi>.</note> and will distress
them in order that they may find ...(?)
</p>
</quote>

<p>
Such is the most to be made of the fragment of
which there are many interpretations. The next
piece, 19-22, is generally acknowledged to be
Jeremiah's. It has the ring of his earlier Oracles.
<pb n='208'/><anchor id='Pg208'/>
The Hebrew and Greek texts differ as to the
speaker in 19<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>. Probably the Greek is correct&mdash;the
Prophet or the Deity addresses the city or
nation and the Prophet replies for the latter
identifying himself with her sufferings. It is
possible, however, that the words <hi rend='italic'>But I said</hi> are
misplaced and should begin the verse, in which
case the Hebrew <hi rend='italic'>my</hi> is to be preferred to the
Greek <hi rend='italic'>thy</hi> adopted below. If so the stoicism of 19
is remarkable.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Woe is me for thy<note place='foot'>So Greek, Hebrew
<hi rend='italic'>my</hi>.</note> ruin,&nbsp;&nbsp;19</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Sore is thy<note place='foot'>So Greek, Hebrew
<hi rend='italic'>my</hi>.</note> stroke!</l>
<l>But I said,</l>
<l>Well, this sickness is mine<note place='foot'>So some Greek and
Latin versions, Syriac and Targ.</note></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And I must bear it!</l>
<l>Undone is my tent and perished,<note place='foot'>Greek; Hebrew
omits.</note>&nbsp;&nbsp;20</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Snapped all my cords!</l>
<l>My sons&mdash;they went out from me</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And they are not!</l>
<l>None now to stretch me my tent</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Or hang up my curtains.</l>
<l>For that the shepherds<note place='foot'>I.e. Rulers.</note>
are brutish&nbsp;&nbsp;21</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Nor seek of the Lord,</l>
<l>Therefore prosper they shall not,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>All scattered their flock.<note place='foot'>Hebrew,
<hi rend='italic'>pastures</hi>.</note></l>
<pb n='209'/><anchor id='Pg209'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Hark the bruit,&nbsp;&nbsp;X. 22</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Behold it comes,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And uproar great</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>From land of the North,</l>
<l>To lay the cities of Judah waste,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>A lair of jackals.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
As we have seen, Jeremiah in the excitement of
alarm falls on short lines, ejaculations of two
stresses each, sometimes as here with one longer
line.<note place='foot'>See above, pp. <ref target="Pg046">46</ref> f.,
<ref target="Pg093">93</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
A quatrain follows of longer, equal lines as is
usual with Jeremiah when expressing spiritual
truths:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Lord I know! Not to man is his way,&nbsp;&nbsp;23</l>
<l>Not man's to walk or settle his steps.</l>
<l>Chasten me, Lord, but with judgment,&nbsp;&nbsp;24</l>
<l>Not in wrath, lest Thou bring me to little!</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
The last verse of the chapter is of a temper
unlike that of Jeremiah elsewhere towards other
nations, and so like the temper against them felt
by later generations in Israel, that most probably
it is not his.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>[Pour out Thy rage on the nations,&nbsp;&nbsp;25</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Who do not own Thee,</l>
<l>And out on the kingdoms</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Who call not Thy Name!</l>
<pb n='210'/><anchor id='Pg210'/>
<l>For Jacob they devoured and consumed,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And wasted his homestead]<note place='foot'>So, following
some Greek MSS., Targ., and the parallel Ps.
lxxix. 6, 7.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Another series of Oracles, as reasonably referred
to the reign of Jehoiakim as to any other stage of
Jeremiah's career, is scattered over Chs. XI-XX.
I reserve to a later lecture upon his spiritual conflict
and growth those which disclose his debates
with his God, his people and himself&mdash;XI. 18-XII.
6, XV. 10-XVI. 9, XVII. 14-18, XVIII. 18-23,
XX. 7-18, and I take now only such as deal
with the character and the doom of the nation.
</p>

<p>
Of these the first in the order in which they
appear in the Book is XI. 15, 16, with which we
have already dealt,<note place='foot'>Above, pp.
<ref target="Pg152">152</ref> ff.</note> and the second is XII. 7-13,
generally acknowledged to be Jeremiah's own.
It is undated, but of the invasions of this time the
one it most clearly reflects is that of the mixed
hordes let loose by Nebuchadrezzar on Judah in
602 or in 598.<note place='foot'>P. <ref target="Pg176">176</ref>. Practically
all agree to this. Admitting its possibility,
Duhm prefers to assign the lines to the Scythian invasion,
against which see the reasons offered by Cornill <hi rend='italic'>in loco</hi>, who
further suggests a connection between xi. 15, 16 and xii. 7-13.
Ball, after Naegelsbach, argues for a date before Carchemish.</note>
The invasion is more probably
described as actual than imagined as
imminent. God Himself is the speaker: His <hi rend='italic'>House</hi>,
as the parallel <hi rend='italic'>Heritage</hi> shows, is not the Temple
<pb n='211'/><anchor id='Pg211'/>
but the Land, His <hi rend='italic'>Domain</hi>. The sentence pronounced
upon it is a final sentence, yet delivered
by the Divine Judge with pain and with astonishment
that He has to deliver it against His <hi rend='italic'>Beloved</hi>;
and this pathos Jeremiah's poetic rendering of the
sentence finely brings out by putting verse 9<hi rend='italic'>a</hi> in
the form of a question. The Prophet feels the
Heart of God as moved as his own by the doom
of the people.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>I have forsaken My House,&nbsp;&nbsp;XII. 7</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>I have left My Heritage,</l>
<l>I have given the Beloved of My Soul</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>To the hand of her foes.</l>
<l>My Heritage to Me is become&nbsp;&nbsp;8</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Like a lion in the jungle,</l>
<l>She hath given against Me her voice,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Therefore I hate her.</l>
<l>Is My Heritage to Me a speckled wild-bird&nbsp;&nbsp;9</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>With wild-birds round and against her?</l>
<l>Go, gather all beasts of the field,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Bring them on to devour.</l>
<l>Shepherds so many My Vineyard have spoiled&nbsp;&nbsp;10</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Have trampled My Lot&mdash;</l>
<l>My pleasant Lot they have turned</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>To a desolate desert</l>
<l>They make it a waste, it mourns,&nbsp;&nbsp;11</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On Me is the waste!</l>
<l>All the land is made desolate,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>None lays it to heart!</l>
<pb n='212'/><anchor id='Pg212'/>
<l>Over the bare desert heights&nbsp;&nbsp;12</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Come in the destroyers!</l>
<l>[For the sword of the Lord is devouring</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>From the end of the land,</l>
<l>And on to the end of the land,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>No peace to all flesh.<note place='foot'>The text
of these four lines is hardly metrical.</note></l>
<l>Wheat have they sown and reaped thorns,&nbsp;&nbsp;13</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Have travailed for nought,</l>
<l>Ashamed of their crop shall they be</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>In the heat of God's wrath.]</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
The last eight lines are doubtfully original:
the speaker is no longer God Himself. There
follows, in verses 14-17, a paragraph in prose,
which is hardly relevant&mdash;a later addition,
whether from the Prophet or an editor.
</p>

<p>
The next metrical Oracles are appended to the
Parables of the Waist-cloth and of the Jars in
Ch. XIII.<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target="Pg183">183-185</ref>.</note>
We have already quoted, in proof of
Jeremiah's poetic power, the most solemn warning
he gave to his people, XIII. 15, 16.<note place='foot'>p.
<ref target="Pg059">59</ref>.</note> At
some time these lines were added to it:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>But if ye will not hear it:&nbsp;&nbsp;XIII. 17</l>
<l>In secret my soul shall weep</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Because of your pride,</l>
<l>And mine eyes run down with tears</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>For the flock of the Lord led captive.<note place='foot'>In
this quatrain Greek reads <hi rend='italic'>your soul</hi>, and Hebrew
<hi rend='italic'>my eye</hi> and precedes this line by <hi rend='italic'>shall weep
indeed</hi> which Greek omits. The last line is one of those longer ones with which
verses or strophes often conclude (see p. <ref target="Pg035">35</ref>).</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<pb n='213'/><anchor id='Pg213'/>

<p>
The next Oracle in metre is an elegy, probably
prospective, on the fate of Jehoiachin and his
mother Nehushta.<note place='foot'>II. Kings xxiv. 8, 15; Jer. xxii. 26.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Say to the King and Her Highness,&nbsp;&nbsp;18</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Low be ye seated!</l>
<l>For from your heads is come down</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The crown of your splendour.</l>
<l>The towns of the Southland are blocked&nbsp;&nbsp;19</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>With none to open.</l>
<l>All Judah is gone into exile,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Exile entire.<note place='foot'>So Greek.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The flock of the Lord</hi>, verse 17, comes again into
the next poem, addressed to Jerusalem as appears
from the singular form of the verbs and pronouns
preserved throughout by the Greek (but only in
20<hi rend='italic'>b</hi> by the Hebrew) which to the disturbance of
the metre adds the name of the city&mdash;probably a
marginal note that by the hand of some copyist
has been drawn into the text. In verse 21 the
people, whom Judah has wooed to be her ally but
who are about to become her tyrant, are, of course,
the Babylonians.<note place='foot'>See ii. 36, iv. 30; Ezek. xxiii. 22.</note>
</p>

<pb n='214'/><anchor id='Pg214'/>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Lift up thine eyes and look,&nbsp;&nbsp;XIII. 20</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>They come from the North!</l>
<l>Where is the flock that was given thee,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Thy beautiful flock?</l>
<l>What wilt thou say when they set&nbsp;&nbsp;21</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>O'er thee as heads,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>As
heads</hi> obviously belongs to this second line of the quatrain,
from which some copyist has removed it to the fourth.</note></l>
<l>Those whom thyself wast training</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>To be to thee friends?</l>
<l>Shall pangs not fasten upon thee,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Like a woman's in travail?</l>
<l>And if thou say in thine heart,&nbsp;&nbsp;22</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Why fall on me these?</l>
<l>For the mass of thy guilt stripped are thy skirts,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Ravished thy limbs!</l>
<l>Can the Ethiop change his skin,&nbsp;&nbsp;23</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Or the leopard his spots?</l>
<l>Then also may ye do good</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Who are wont to do evil.</l>
<l>As the passing chaff I strew them&nbsp;&nbsp;24</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>To the wind of the desert.</l>
<l>This is thy lot, the share I mete thee&mdash;&nbsp;&nbsp;25</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Rede of the Lord&mdash;</l>
<l>Because Me thou hast wholly forgotten</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And trusted in fraud.</l>
<l>So thy skirts I draw over thy face,&nbsp;&nbsp;26</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Thy shame is exposed.</l>
<pb n='215'/><anchor id='Pg215'/>
<l>Thine adulteries, thy neighings,&nbsp;&nbsp;27</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Thy whorish intrigues;</l>
<l>On the heights, in the field have I seen</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Thy detestable deeds.</l>
<l>Jerusalem! Woe unto thee!</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Thou wilt not be clean&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>After how long yet?<note place='foot'>So Hebrew
literally.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Ch. XIV. 1-10 is the fine poem on the Drought
which was rendered in a previous lecture.<note place='foot'>Pp.
<ref target="Pg056">56</ref> f. The date is quite uncertain.</note> It is
followed by a passage in prose, 11-16, that implies
a wilder <q>sea of troubles,</q> not drought only but
war, famine and pestilence. Forbidden to pray for
the people Jeremiah pleads that they have been
misled by the prophets who promised that there
would be neither famine nor war; and the Lord
condemns the prophets for uttering lies in His
Name. Through war and famine prophets and
people alike shall perish.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>And thou shalt say this word to them:&nbsp;&nbsp;XIV. 17</l>
<l>Let your eyes run down with tears</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Day and night without ceasing,</l>
<l>For broken, broken is the Daughter of my people,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>With the direst of strokes!</l>
<l>Fare I forth to the field,&nbsp;&nbsp;18</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Lo the slain of the sword!</l>
<pb n='216'/><anchor id='Pg216'/>
<l>Or come into the city</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Lo anguish of famine!</l>
<l>Yea, prophet and priest go a-begging</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>In a land they know not.<note place='foot'>The text of the
first four lines is uncertain. I have mainly followed the Greek.
<hi rend='italic'>Begging</hi>, if we borrow the sense of the verb
in Syriac, otherwise <hi rend='italic'>huckstering</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>peddling</hi>.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Some see reflected in these lines the situation
after Megiddo, when Egyptian troops may have
worked such evils on Judah; but more probably
it is the still worse situation after the surrender
of Jerusalem to Nebuchadrezzar. There follows,
19-22, another prayer of the people (akin to that
following the drought, 7-9) which some take to
be later than Jeremiah. The metre is unusual, if
indeed it be metre and not rhythmical prose.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>[Hast Thou utterly cast off Judah,&nbsp;&nbsp;19</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Loathes Ṣion Thy soul?</l>
<l>Why hast Thou smitten us so</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>That for us is no healing?</l>
<l>Hoped we for peace&mdash;no good!</l>
<l>For a season of healing&mdash;lo panic!</l>
<l>We acknowledge, O Lord, our wickedness,&nbsp;&nbsp;20</l>
<l>The guilt of our fathers; to Thee have we sinned.</l>
<l>For the sake of Thy Name, do not spurn us,&nbsp;&nbsp;21</l>
<l>Debase not the Throne of Thy Glory,</l>
<l>Remember, break not Thy Covenant with us!</l>
<pb n='217'/><anchor id='Pg217'/>
<l>'Mongst the bubbles of the nations are makers of rain,&nbsp;&nbsp;22</l>
<l>Or do the heavens give the showers?</l>
<l>Art Thou not He for whom we must wait?</l>
<l>Yea, Thou hast created all these.]</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
As the Book now runs this prayer receives from
God a repulse, XV. 1-4, similar to that which was
received by the people's prayer after the drought
XIV. 10-12, and to that which Hosea heard to the
prayer of his generation.<note place='foot'>Hos. vi.
1-4.</note> Intercession for such
a people is useless, were it made even by Moses
and Samuel; they are doomed to perish by the
sword, famine and exile. This passage is in prose
and of doubtful origin. But the next lines are in
Jeremiah's favourite metre and certainly his own.
They either describe or (less probably) anticipate
the disaster of 598. God Himself again is the
speaker as in XII. 7-11. His Patience which the
Parable of the Potter illustrated has its limits,<note place='foot'>P.
<ref target="Pg189">189</ref>.</note>
and these have now been reached. It is not God
who is to blame, but Jerusalem and Judah who
have failed Him.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Jerusalem, who shall pity,&nbsp;&nbsp;XV. 5</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Who shall bemoan thee,</l>
<l>Who will but turn him to ask</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>After thy welfare?</l>
<l>'Tis thou that hast left Me&mdash;Rede of the Lord&mdash;&nbsp;&nbsp;6</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Still going backward.</l>
<pb n='218'/><anchor id='Pg218'/>
<l>So I stretched my hand<note place='foot'>Hebrew and some Greek MSS. add
<hi rend='italic'>against thee</hi>.</note> and destroyed thee</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Tired of relenting.</l>
<l>With a winnowing fork I winnowed them&nbsp;&nbsp;7</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>In the gates of the land.</l>
<l>I bereaved and destroyed my people</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Because of their evil.<note place='foot'>Hebrew,
<hi rend='italic'>they turned not from their ways</hi>.</note></l>
<l>I saw their widows outnumber&nbsp;&nbsp;8</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The sand of the seas.</l>
<l>I brought on the mother of youths(?)</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Destruction at noonday,</l>
<l>And let fall sudden upon them</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Anguish and terrors.<note place='foot'>The text of verse
8 is uncertain. I have mainly followed the Greek.</note></l>
<l>She that bare seven hath fainted,&nbsp;&nbsp;9</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Breathes out her life,</l>
<l>Set is her sun in the daytime</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Shamed and abashed!</l>
<l>And their remnant I give to the sword</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>In face of their foes!<note place='foot'>Hebrew adds
<hi rend='italic'>Rede of the Lord</hi>.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Through the rest of Ch. XV and through
XVI and XVII are a number of those personal
passages, which I have postponed to a subsequent
lecture upon Jeremiah's spiritual
struggles,<note place='foot'><ref target="Lecture_VII">Lecture vii</ref>.</note> and
also several passages which by outlook and
phrasing belong to a later age. The impression
left by this miscellany is that of a collection of
<pb n='219'/><anchor id='Pg219'/>
sayings put together by an editor out of some
Oracles by our Prophet himself and deliverances
by other prophets on the same or similar themes.
In pursuance of the plan I proposed I take now only
those passages in which Jeremiah deals with the
character of his people and their deserved doom.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Thus saith the Lord&mdash;&nbsp;&nbsp;XVI. 5</l>
<l>Come not to the home of mourning,</l>
<l>Nor go about to lament,<note place='foot'>Hebrew adds <hi rend='italic'>nor
bemoan them</hi>, an expansion.</note></l>
<l>For my Peace I have swept away&mdash;</l>
<l>Away from this people.<note place='foot'>Hebrew adds <hi rend='italic'>Rede of
the Lord, even kindness and compassion</hi>; verses 6 and 7 are expansion.</note></l>
<l>Nor enter the house of feasting,&nbsp;&nbsp;8</l>
<l>To sit with them eating and drinking</l>
<l>For thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel;&nbsp;&nbsp;9</l>
<l>Lo, I make to cease from this place,</l>
<l>To your eyes, in your days,</l>
<l>The voices of joy and rejoicing,</l>
<l>The voices of bridegroom and bride.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
There follows a passage in prose, 10-13, which in
terms familiar to us, recites the nation's doom,
their exile. Verses 14, 15 break the connection
with 16 ff., and find their proper place in XXIII.
7-8, where they recur. Verses 16-18 predict,
under the figures of fishers and hunters, the
arrival of bands of invaders, who shall sweep the
country of its inhabitants, because of the idolatries
with which these have polluted it. There is no
<pb n='220'/><anchor id='Pg220'/>
reason to deny these verses to Jeremiah. In 19,
20 we come to another metrical piece, singing of
the conversion of the heathen from their idols&mdash;the
only piece of its kind from Jeremiah&mdash;which
we may more suitably consider later. Verse 21
seems more in place after 18.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>The sin of Judah is writ&nbsp;&nbsp;XVII. 1</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>With pen of iron,</l>
<l>With the point of a diamond graven</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On the plate of their heart&mdash;</l>
<l>And eke on the horns of their altars,<note place='foot'>Hebrew adds
<hi rend='italic'>when their children remember their altars and
Asherim</hi> rightly taken by Duhm and Cornill as a gloss.</note></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And each spreading tree,</l>
<l>Upon all the lofty heights&nbsp;&nbsp;2</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And hills of the wild</l>
<l>Thy substance and all thy treasures&nbsp;&nbsp;3</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>For spoil I give,</l>
<l>Because of sin thy high places</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Throughout thy borders.</l>
<l>Thine heritage thou shalt surrender<note place='foot'>Hebrew adds
<hi rend='italic'>in thee</hi> for which some read <hi rend='italic'>thy
hand</hi>.</note>&nbsp;&nbsp;4</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Which I have given thee,</l>
<l>And thy foes I shall make thee to serve</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>In a land thou knowest not.</l>
<l>Ye have kindled a fire in my wrath</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>That for ever shall burn.<note place='foot'>These four
verses along with the phrase <hi rend='italic'>Thus saith the Lord</hi>
which follows them are lacking in Greek. This is clearly due to
the oversight of a copyist, his eye passing inadvertently from <hi rend='italic'>the
Lord</hi> of xvi. 21 to <hi rend='italic'>the Lord</hi> of xvii. 5.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<pb n='221'/><anchor id='Pg221'/>

<p>
These verses, characteristic of Jeremiah, are more
so of his earliest period than of his work in the
reign of Jehoiakim, and may have been among
those which he added to his Second Roll. They
are succeeded by the beautiful reflections on the
man who does not trust the Lord and on the man
who does, verses 5-8, quoted in a previous lecture.<note place='foot'>See pp.
<ref target="Pg053">53</ref>, <ref target="Pg054">54</ref>.</note>
The rest of the chapter consists of passages
personal to himself, to be considered later, and of
an exhortation to keep the Sabbath, verses 19-27,
which is probably post-exilic.<note place='foot'>Cp. <q>Isaiah,</q>
lvi. 2-7, lviii. 13, 14; Neh. xiii. 15-22.</note>
</p>

<p>
In Ch. XVIII the Parable of the Potter is
followed by a metrical Oracle which has all the
marks of Jeremiah's style and repeats the finality
of the doom, to which the nation's forgetfulness
of God and idolatry have brought it. Once more
the poet contrasts the constancy of nature with
his people's inconstancy. Neither the metre nor
the sense of the text is so mutilated as some have
supposed.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Therefore thus saith the Lord:&nbsp;&nbsp;XVIII. 13</l>
<l>Ask ye now of the nations,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Who heard of the like?</l>
<l>The horror she hath grossly wrought,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Virgin of Israel.</l>
<l>Fails from the mountain rock&nbsp;&nbsp;14</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The snow of Lebánon?</l>
<pb n='222'/><anchor id='Pg222'/>
<l>Or the streams from the hills dry up,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The cold flowing streams?<note place='foot'>A much
manipulated verse! <hi rend='italic'>Mountain</hi>, taking
<hi rend='italic'>sadai</hi> in its archaic sense as in Assyrian and some Hebrew
poems, Jud. v. 4, Deut. xxxii. 13 (see the writer's <q>Deut.</q> in the <q>Camb.
Bible for Schools</q>) where it is parallel to <hi rend='italic'>highlands</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>rock</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>flinty rock</hi>. The following
emendations of the text are therefore unnecessary, and are more or less forced.
<hi rend='italic'>Sirion</hi> (Duhm, Cornill, Peake, McFadyen, Skinner);
<hi rend='italic'>missurîm = from the rocks</hi> (Rothstein). The Greek takes
<hi rend='italic'>sadai</hi> as <hi rend='italic'>breasts</hi> and nominative to
the verb: <hi rend='italic'>Do the breasts of the rock give out?</hi>&mdash;not a
bad figure. <hi rend='italic'>Hill-streams</hi> reading <hi rend='italic'>mêmê
harîm</hi> (Rothstein) for the Hebrew <hi rend='italic'>maîm zarîm = strange</hi>
(? far off) <hi rend='italic'>streams</hi>. Ewald takes <hi rend='italic'>zarîm</hi>
from <hi rend='italic'>zarar = to rush, press</hi>. Duhm reads
<hi rend='italic'>mĕzarîm = Northstar</hi>. Cornill turns the couplet to
<hi rend='italic'>Or do dry up from the western sea the flowing waters?</hi>
Gillies, <hi rend='italic'>the wet winds from the sea</hi>, etc., for
which there is a suggestion in the Greek α μῳ.</note></l>
<l>Yet Me have My people forgotten,&nbsp;&nbsp;15</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And burned<note place='foot'>See p.
<ref target="Pg149">149</ref>, n. 1</note> to vanity,</l>
<l>Stumbling from off their ways,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The tracks of yore,</l>
<l>To straggle along the by-paths,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>An unwrought road;</l>
<l>Turning their land to a waste,&nbsp;&nbsp;16</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>A perpetual hissing.</l>
<l>All who pass by are appalled,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And shake their heads.</l>
<l>With<note place='foot'>So some MSS.; the text has
<hi rend='italic'>like</hi>.</note> an east wind strew them I shall,&nbsp;&nbsp;17</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>In face of the foe.</l>
<l>My back not my face shall I show them</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>In their day of disaster.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<pb n='223'/><anchor id='Pg223'/>

<p>
Personal passages follow in verses 18-23, and
in XIX-XX. 6, the Symbol of the Earthen Jar
and the episode of the Prophet's arrest with its
consequences, which we have already considered,<note place='foot'>Pp.
<ref target="Pg191">191</ref> ff.</note>
and then other personal passages in XX. 7-18.
Ch. XXI. 1-10 is from the reign of Ṣedekiah; 11,
12 are a warning to the royal house of unknown
date, and 13, 14 a sentence upon a certain stronghold,
which in this connection ought to be
Jerusalem, but cannot be because of the epithets
<hi rend='italic'>Inhabitress of the Vale</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>Rock of the Plain</hi>, that are
quite inappropriate to Jerusalem. This is another
proof of how the editors of the Book have swept
into it a number of separate Oracles, whether
relevant to each other or not, and whether
Jeremiah's own or from some one else.
</p>

<p>
From Chs. XXII-XXIII. 8, a series of Oracles
on the kings of Judah, we have had before us
the elegy on Jehoahaz, XXII. 10 (with a prose
note on 11, 12) and the denunciation of Jehoiakim,
13-19.<note place='foot'>Pp. <ref target="Pg164">164-167</ref>.</note>
There remain the warning (in prose) to
do judgment and justice with the threat on the
king's house, XXII. 1-5, and the following
Oracles:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
XXII. 6. For thus saith the Lord concerning
the house of the king of Judah<note place='foot'>Duhm's objection to this title as a
mistake by an editor is groundless; for though the following lines are addressed to
the land or people as a whole, their climax is upon the fate of the
royal house, <hi rend='italic'>the choice of thy cedars</hi>.</note>&mdash;
</p>
<pb n='224'/><anchor id='Pg224'/>
<lg>
<l>A Gilead art thou to Me,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Or head of Lebánon,</l>
<l>Yet shall I make thee a desert</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Of tenantless cities.</l>
<l>I will hallow against thee destroyers,&nbsp;&nbsp;7</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Each with his weapons,</l>
<l>They shall cut down the choice of thy cedars</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And fell them for fuel.</l>
</lg>
<p>
8. [And<note place='foot'>Hebrew adds <hi rend='italic'>many</hi>.</note>
nations shall pass by this city and
shall say each to his mate, For what hath
the Lord done thus to this great city? 9. And
they shall answer, Because they forsook the
Covenant of the Lord their God, and bowed
themselves to other gods and served them.]
</p>
</quote>

<p>
Whether this piece of prose be from Jeremiah
himself or from another is uncertain and of no
importance. It is a true statement of his own
interpretation of the cause of his people's doom.
The next Oracle addressed to the nation is upon
King Jeconiah, or Koniyahu. I follow mainly the
Greek.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Up to Lebánon and cry,&nbsp;&nbsp;XXII. 20</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Give forth thy voice in Bashán,</l>
<l>And cry from Abarîm<note place='foot'>Greek <hi rend='italic'>from over the
sea</hi>.</note> that broken</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Be all thy lovers.</l>
<l>I spake to thee in thy prosperity,&nbsp;&nbsp;21</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Thou saidst, I hear not!</l>
<l>This was thy way from thy youth,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Not to hark to My Voice.</l>
<pb n='225'/><anchor id='Pg225'/>
<l>All thy shepherds the wind shall shepherd,&nbsp;&nbsp;22</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Thy lovers go captive.</l>
<l>Then shamed shalt thou be and confounded</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>For all thine ill-doing.</l>
<l>Thou in Lebánon that dwellest,&nbsp;&nbsp;23</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Nested on cedars,</l>
<l>How shalt thou groan<note place='foot'>Greek, Syriac,
Vulgate.</note> when come on thee pangs,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Anguish as hers that beareth.</l>
<l>As I live&mdash;'t is the Rede of the Lord&mdash;&nbsp;&nbsp;24</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Though Konyahu were</l>
<l>Upon My right hand the signet,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Thence would I tear him.<note place='foot'>Hebrew
<hi rend='italic'>thee</hi>.
</note></l>
</lg>
<p>
25. And I shall give thee into the hand of them
that seek thy life and into the hand of them
thou dreadest, even into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar,
king of Babylon, and into the
hand of the Chaldeans; [26] and I will hurl thee
out, and thy mother who bare thee, upon
another land, where ye were not born, and
there shall ye die. 27. And to the land, towards
which they shall be lifting their soul,<note place='foot'>Hebrew adds
<hi rend='italic'>to return thither</hi>; Greek lacks.</note> they
shall not return.
</p>
<lg>
<l>Is Konyahu then despised,&nbsp;&nbsp;28</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Like a nauseous vessel?</l>
<l>Why is he flung and cast out</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On a land he knows not?</l>
<pb n='226'/><anchor id='Pg226'/>
<l>Land, Land, Land,&nbsp;&nbsp;29</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Hear the Word of the Lord!</l>
<l>Write this man down as childless,&nbsp;&nbsp;30</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>A fellow ...(?)</l>
<l>For none of his seed shall flourish</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Seated on David's throne,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Or ruling still in Judah.<note place='foot'>In 28-30 the
Greek, mainly followed above in accordance
with the metre, is far shorter than the Hebrew text.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
We can reasonably deny to Jeremiah nothing
of all this passage, not even the prose by which
the metre is interrupted. We have seen how
natural it was for the rhapsodists of his race to
pass from verse to prose and again from prose to
verse. Nor are the repetitions superfluous, not
even that four-fold <hi rend='italic'>into the hand of</hi> in the prose
section, for at each recurrence of the phrase we
feel the grip of their captor closing more fast
upon the doomed king and people. Nor are we
required to take the pathetic words, <hi rend='italic'>the land to
which they shall be lifting up their soul</hi>, as true only
of those who have been long banished. For the
exiles to Babylon felt this home-sickness from the
very first, as Jeremiah well knew.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='stars: 5'/>

<p>
If we are to trust the date given by its title&mdash;and
no sufficient reason exists against our doing
so&mdash;there is still an Oracle of Jeremiah, which,
though now standing far down in our Book,
Ch. XLV, belongs to the reign of Jehoiakim, and
<pb n='227'/><anchor id='Pg227'/>
is properly a supplement to the story of the
writing of the Rolls by Baruch in 605.<note place='foot'>The reasons given by
Giesebrecht and Duhm <hi rend='italic'>in loco</hi>, by
Skinner, p. 346, and (more fancifully) by Erbt, p. 86, for impugning
the date given in xlv. 1, and relegating the Oracle to the
close of Jeremiah's life in exile as his last words to Baruch, have
been answered in great detail, and to my mind conclusively, by
Cornill, who points out how much more suited the Oracle is to
conditions in 605 than to those of Baruch and Jeremiah after 586.</note> The
text has suffered, probably more than we can now
detect.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
XLV. 1. The Word, which Jeremiah the prophet
spake to Baruch, the son of Neriah, while he
was writing these words in a book at the
mouth of Jeremiah,<note place='foot'>Cornill: <hi rend='italic'>the words of
Jeremiah in a book</hi>.</note> in the fourth year of
Jehoiakim, son of Josiah, king of Judah.<note place='foot'>Hebrew adds
<hi rend='italic'>saying</hi>.</note>
2. Thus saith the Lord<note place='foot'>Hebrew adds <hi rend='italic'>the God
of Israel</hi>.</note> concerning thee, O
Baruch, [3] for thou didst say:&mdash;
</p>
<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Woe is me! Woe is me!<note place='foot'>So Greek.</note></l>
<l>How hath the Lord on my pain heaped sorrow!</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>I am worn with my groaning,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Rest I find none!</l>
<l>[Thus shalt thou say to him<note place='foot'>Superfluous after, not to say
inconsistent with, verse 2; probably editorial.</note>]
thus sayeth the Lord:&nbsp;&nbsp;4</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Lo, what I built I have to destroy,</l>
<pb n='228'/><anchor id='Pg228'/>
<l>And what I planted I have to root up.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I have
to</hi> or <hi rend='italic'>am about to</hi>. The Hebrew addition to this
couplet, <hi rend='italic'>and that is the whole earth</hi>, is probably a gloss;
it is not found in all Greek versions.</note></l>
<l>Thou, dost thou seek thee great things?&nbsp;&nbsp;5</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Seek thou them not,</l>
<l>For behold, on all flesh I bring evil&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Rede of the Lord&mdash;</l>
<l>But I give thee thy life as a prey,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Wheresoever thou goest.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
The younger man, with youth's high hopes for
his people and ambitions for himself in their
service&mdash;ambitions which he could honestly
cherish by right both of his station in life<note place='foot'>His brother Seraiah
was a high officer of the king, ch. li.
59; see also Josephus X. <q>Antt.,</q> ix. 1.</note>
and the firmness of his character&mdash;felt his spirit
spent beneath the long-drawn weight of all the
Oracles of Doom, which it was his fate to inscribe
as final. Now to Baruch in such a mood the
older man, the Prophet, might have appealed from
his own example, for none in that day was more
stripped than Jeremiah himself, of family, friends,
affections, or hopes of positive results from his
ministry; nor was there any whose life had been
more often snatched from the jaws of death. But
instead of quoting his own case Jeremiah brought
to his despairing servant and friend a still higher
example. The Lord Himself had been forced to
relinquish His designs and to destroy what He
<pb n='229'/><anchor id='Pg229'/>
had built and to uproot what He had planted. In
face of such Divine surrender, both of purpose and
achievement, what was the resignation by a
mere man, or even by a whole nation, of their
hopes or ambitions? Let Baruch be content to
expect nothing beyond bare life: <hi rend='italic'>thy life shall I
give thee for a prey</hi>. This stern phrase is found
four times in the Oracles of Jeremiah,<note place='foot'>Here
and xxi. 9, xxxviii. 2, xxxix. 18.</note> and nowhere
else. It is not more due to the Prophet
than to the conditions of his generation. Jeremiah
only put into words what must have been felt by
all the men of his time&mdash;those terrible years in
which, through the Oracles quoted in this lecture,
he has shown us War, Drought, Famine and
Pestilence fatally passing over his land; when
<hi rend='italic'>Death came up by the windows</hi>, children were
cut off from their playgrounds and youths from
the squares where they gathered, and the corpses
of men were scattered like dung on the fields. It
was indeed a time when each survivor must have
felt that his life had been <hi rend='italic'>given</hi>
him <hi rend='italic'>for a prey</hi>.
</p>

<p>
To the hearts of us who have lived through
the Great War, with its heavy toll on the lives
both of the young and of the old, this phrase of
Jeremiah brings the Prophet and his contemporaries
very near.
</p>

<p>
Yet more awful than the physical calamities
which the prophet unveils throughout these
<pb n='230'/><anchor id='Pg230'/>
terrible years are his bitter portraits of the
character of his people, whom no word of their
God nor any of His heavy judgments could move
to repentance. He paints a hopeless picture of
society in Jerusalem and Judah under Jehoiakim,
rotten with dishonesty and vice. Members of
the same family are unable to trust each other;
all are bent on their own gain by methods
unjust and cruel&mdash;from top to bottom so hopelessly
false as even to be blind to the meaning of
the disasters which rapidly befal them and to the
final doom that steadily draws near. Yet, for all
the wrath he pours upon his generation and the
Divine vengeance of which he is sure, how the
man still loves and clings to them, and takes their
doom as his own! And, greatest of all, how he
reads in the heart that was in him the Heart of
God Himself&mdash;the same astonishment that the
people are so callous, the same horror of their
ruin, nay the same sense of failure and of suffering
under the burden of such a waste&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>on Me is the
waste!</hi><note place='foot'>ix. 3, 7 (<hi rend='italic'>How else can I do?</hi>),
xii. 9, 11, see p. <ref target="Pg211">211</ref>.</note>
<hi rend='italic'>What I built I have to destroy!</hi>
</p>

<p>
Except that he does not share these secrets of
the Heart of God, it is of Victor Hugo among
moderns that I have been most reminded when
working through Jeremiah's charges against the
king, the priests, the prophets and the whole
people of Judah&mdash;Victor Hugo in his <hi rend='italic'>Châtiments</hi> of
<pb n='231'/><anchor id='Pg231'/>
the monarch, the church, the journalists, the
courtiers and other creatures of the Third French
Empire. There is the same mordant frankness
and satiric rage combined with the same desire to
share the miseries of the critic's people in spite
of their faults. I have already quoted Hugo's
lines on Napoleon III as parallel to Jeremiah's on
Jehoiakim.<note place='foot'>See p. <ref target="Pg167">167</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
Here are two other parallels.
</p>

<p>
To Jeremiah's description of his people being
persuaded that all was well, when well it was not,
and refusing to own their dishonour, VIII. 11, 12,
take Hugo's <q>on est infâme et content</q> and
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Et tu chantais, en proie aux éclatants mensonges</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 10'>Du succès.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
And to Jeremiah's acceptance of the miseries
of his people as his own and refusal to the end
to part from them take these lines to France:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Je te demanderai ma part de tes misères,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Moi ton fils.</l>
<l>France, tu verras bien qu'humble tête éclipsée</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>J'avais foi,</l>
<l>Et que je n'eus jamais dans l'âme une pensée</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Que pour toi.</l>
<l>France, être sur ta claie à l'heure où l'on te traine</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Aux cheveux,</l>
<l>O ma mère, et porter mon anneau de ta chaine</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Je le veux!</l>
</lg>
</quote>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='232'/><anchor id='Pg232'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc' level1='Lecture VI. To The End And After.'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Lecture VI.'/>
<head type='sub'>Lecture VI.</head>
<head>To The End And After. 597-? <hi rend='smallcaps'>B.C.</hi></head>

<p>
The few remaining years of the Jewish kingdom
ran rapidly down and their story is soon told.
</p>

<p>
When Nebuchadrezzar deported King Jehoiachin
in 597, he set up in his place his uncle
Mattaniah, a son of Josiah by that Hamutal, who
was also the mother of the miserable Jehoahaz.<note place='foot'>2 Kings
xxiii. 31, xxiv. 17; see above, p. <ref target="Pg164">164</ref>.</note>
The name of the new king Nebuchadrezzar
changed to Ṣedekiah, <hi rend='italic'>Righteousness</hi> or <hi rend='italic'>Truth of
Jehovah</hi>,<note place='foot'>The exact transliteration of the Hebrew is
<hi rend='italic'>Ṣidḳiyahu</hi>.</note> intending thus to bind the Jew by the
name of his own God to the oath of allegiance
which he had exacted from him. When Ezekiel
afterwards denounced Ṣedekiah on his revolt it
was for <hi rend='italic'>despising the Lord's oath and breaking the
Lord's covenant</hi><note place='foot'>Ezek. xvi. 59, xvii. 11-21;
especially 15-19.</note>&mdash;a signal instance of the sanctity
attached in the ancient world to an oath sworn
by one nation to another, even though it was to
the humiliation of the swearer.<note place='foot'>Ps. xv., <hi rend='italic'>who
sweareth to his own hurt and changeth not</hi>.</note> So far as we see,
<pb n='233'/><anchor id='Pg233'/>
Ṣedekiah was of a temper<note place='foot'>Josephus imputes to
him χρεστότης καὶ δικαιοσύνη, X. <q>Antt.</q> vii. 5.</note> to have been content
with the peace, which the observance of his oath
would have secured to him. But he was a weak
man, master no more of himself than of his
throne,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>No strong rod, no sceptre
to rule</hi>, Ezek. xix. 14.</note> distracted between a half-superstitious
respect for the one high influence left to him in
Jeremiah and the opposite pressure, first from a
set of upstarts who had succeeded to the estates
and the posts about court of their banished
betters, and second, from those prophets whose
personal insignificance can have been the only
reason of their escape from deportation. It is one
of the notable ironies of history that, while Nebuchadrezzar
had planned to render Judah powerless
to rebel again, by withdrawing from her all the
wisest and most skilful and soldierly of her population,
he should have left to her her fanatics!
</p>

<p>
There remained in Jerusalem the elements&mdash;sincerely
patriotic but rash and in politics inexperienced&mdash;of
a <q>war-party,</q> restless to revolt
from Babylon and blindly confident of the strength
of their walls and of their men to resist the arms
of the great Empire. Of their nation they and
their fellows alone had been spared the judgment
of the Lord and prided themselves on being the
Remnant to which Isaiah had promised survival
and security on their own land: for they said to
<pb n='234'/><anchor id='Pg234'/>
the Exiles, <hi rend='italic'>Get ye far from the Lord, for unto us is
this land given in possession.</hi><note place='foot'>Or <hi rend='italic'>ye
are far</hi>, etc., Ezek. xi. 15.</note> Through the early
uneventful years of Ṣedekiah, this stupid and
self-righteous party found time to gather strength,
and in his fourth year must have been stirred towards
action by the arrival in Jerusalem of messengers
from the kings of Edom, Moab, Ammon, Tyre
and Ṣidon, all of them states within the scope of
Egyptian intrigues against Babylon.<note place='foot'>Jer. xxvii.;
in verse 1 for <hi rend='italic'>Jehoiakim</hi> read
<hi rend='italic'>Ṣedekiah</hi>.</note> For the
time the movement came to nothing largely because
of Jeremiah's influence, and Ṣedekiah is said
to have journeyed to Babylon to protest in person
his continued fidelity.<note place='foot'>Jer. li. 59;
though some doubt this.</note> Either then or previously
Nebuchadrezzar imposed on Jerusalem the Babylonian
idolatry which Ezekiel describes as invading
even the Temple.<note place='foot'>Ezek. viii; Jer. xliv. 17-19
and his other references to the worship of the
<hi rend='italic'>Queen</hi> or <hi rend='italic'>Host of Heaven</hi>
may also refer to this.</note>
</p>

<p>
The intrigues of Egypt persisted, however,
and, in 589 or 588, after the accession of Pharaoh
Hophra,<note place='foot'>Jer. xliv. 30, <hi rend='italic'>Pharaoh</hi>
of xxxvii. 5, 7, 11, Ezek. xxix. 3; <hi rend='italic'>Apries</hi>,
Herodotus ii. 161.</note> at last prevailed upon Judah. Ṣedekiah
yielded to the party of revolt and Nebuchadrezzar
swiftly invested Jerusalem. Roused to realities
<hi rend='italic'>the king and all the people of Jerusalem</hi> offered their
repentance by a solemn covenant before God to
<pb n='235'/><anchor id='Pg235'/>
enfranchise, in obedience to the Law, those slaves
who had reached a seventh year of service. But
when on the news of an Egyptian advance the
Chaldeans raised their siege, the Jewish slave-owners
broke faith and pressed back their
liberated slaves into bondage.<note place='foot'>Jer. xxxiv.
8-22; cp. Exod. xxi. 1-6, Deut. xv. 12-18.</note> This proved the
last link in the long chain of lies and frauds by
which the hopelessly dishonest people fastened
upon them their doom. Egypt again failed her
dupes. The Chaldeans, either by the terror they
inspired or by an actual victory on the field, compelled
her army to retire, and resumed the siege
of Jerusalem. Though Jeremiah counselled surrender
and though the city was sapped by famine
and pestilence, the fanatics&mdash;to whom, however
reluctantly, some admiration is due&mdash;held out
against the forces of Babylon for a year and a
half. Then came the end. The walls on the
north were breached. Ṣedekiah fled by a southern
gate, upon an effort to reach the East of
Jordan. He was overtaken on the plains of
Jericho, his escort scattered and himself carried
to Nebuchadrezzar's head-quarters at Riblah on
the Orontes. Thence, after his sons were slain
before his eyes, and his eyes put out, he was taken
in fetters to Babylon. Nebuṣaradan, a high
Babylonian officer, was dispatched to Jerusalem
to burn the Temple, the Palace and the greater
<pb n='236'/><anchor id='Pg236'/>
houses, and to transport to Babylon a second
multitude of Jews, leaving only <hi rend='italic'>the poorest of
the land to be vine-dressers and husbandmen</hi>.<note place='foot'>2
Kings xxv. 21.</note> This
was in 586.
</p>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<head>1. The Release of Hope. (XXIV, XXIX.)</head>

<p>
From these rapidly descending years a number
of prophecies by Jeremiah have come to us, as
well as narratives of the trials which he endured
because of his faithfulness to the Word of the
Lord, and his sane views of the facts of the time.
As we read these prophecies and narratives
several changes become clear in the position and
circumstances of the Prophet, and in his temper
and outlook. Signally vindicated as his words
have been, we are not surprised that to his contemporaries
he has grown to be a personage of
greater impressiveness and authority than before.
He has still his enemies but these are not found
in exactly the same quarters as under Jehoiakim.
Instead of an implacable king, and princes more
or less respectful and friendly, in the king he has
now a friend, though a timid and ineffective one,
while the new and inferior princes appear almost
wholly against him. Formerly both priests and
prophets had been his foes, but now only the
prophets are mentioned as such, and at least one
<pb n='237'/><anchor id='Pg237'/>
priest is loyal to him.<note place='foot'>xxix. 29;
Skinner, p. 253, doubts this.</note> Inwardly again, he has
no more of those debates with God and his own
soul, which had rent him during the previous
years; only once does doubt escape from his
lips in prayer.<note place='foot'>xxxii.
16-25.</note> Clearest of all, his hope has
been released, and in contrast with his prophesying
up to the surrender of Jerusalem in 597, but
in full agreement with his enduring faith in God's
Freedom and Patience,<note place='foot'>See above, pp.
<ref target="Pg186">186-188</ref>.</note>
he utters not a few predictions
of a future upon their own land for both
Israel and Judah. This greatest of the changes
which appear is due partly to the fact that while
the man's reluctant duty has been to pronounce
the doom of exile upon his people, that doom has
been fulfilled, and his spirit, which never desired
it,<note place='foot'>xvii. 16.</note>
is free to range beyond its shadows. To the
clearness into which he rises he is helped, under
belief in the Divine Grace, by the truth obvious
to all but fanatics that peace and order were
possible for that shaken world only through
submission to Nebuchadrezzar's firm government,
including as this did a policy comparatively
lenient to the Jewish exiles. But there
was another and stronger reason why Jeremiah
should at last turn himself to a ministry of hope,
however sternly he must continue to denounce
the Jews left in Jerusalem and Judah. The
<pb n='238'/><anchor id='Pg238'/>
catastrophe of 597 largely separated the better
elements of the nation, which were swept into
exile, from the worse which remained in the
land.
</p>

<p>
It is this drastic sifting, ethically one of the
most momentous events in the history of Israel,
with which Jeremiah's earliest Oracle under
Ṣedekiah is concerned, Ch. XXIV. Once more
the Word of the Lord starts to him from a vision,
this time of two baskets, one of good the other of
bad figs, which the Lord, he says, <hi rend='italic'>caused me to see</hi>:
a vision which I take to be as physical and actual
as those of the almond-rod and the caldron upon
his call, or of the potter at his wheel, though
others interpret it as imaginative like the visions
of Amos.<note place='foot'>So Driver; Amos vii. 1,
4, 7, viii. 1.</note> Note how easily again the Prophet
passes from verse to prose. The verse is slightly
irregular. The stresses of the four couplets are
these&mdash;3 + 3; 4 + 3; 4 + 3; 3 + 3&mdash;to which the
following version only approximates.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
XXIV. 3. And the Lord said to me, What art
thou seeing, Jeremiah? And I said, Figs,
the good figs very good, and the bad very
bad, which for their<note place='foot'>So
Greek.</note> badness cannot be eaten.
4. And the Word of the Lord came unto me,
[5] saying, Thus saith the Lord, the God of
Israel&mdash;
</p>
<pb n='239'/><anchor id='Pg239'/>
<lg>
<l>Like unto these good figs</l>
<l>I look on the exiles of Judah,</l>
<l>Whom away from this place I have sent</l>
<l>To the Chaldeans' land for (their) good.</l>
<l>For good will I fix Mine eye upon them,&nbsp;&nbsp;6</l>
<l>And bring them back to this land,</l>
<l>And build them and not pull them down,</l>
<l>And plant them and not pluck up.</l>
</lg>
<p>
7. And I will give them a heart to know Me,
that I am the Lord, and they shall be for
a people unto Me, and I will be to them for
God, when they turn to me with all their
heart.
8. But like the bad figs which cannot be eaten
for their<note place='foot'>So Greek and other
versions.</note> badness&mdash;thus saith the Lord&mdash;so
I give up Ṣedekiah, king of Judah, and his
princes and the remnant of Jerusalem, the
left in this land,<note place='foot'>Greek
<hi rend='italic'>city</hi>.</note> with them that dwell in the
land of Egypt.<note place='foot'>Jews who may have
stirred up Egypt against Babylon.</note>
9. And I will set them for consternation<note place='foot'>So Greek;
Hebrew adds <hi rend='italic'>for an evil</hi>, <q>a corrupt repetition
of the preceding word</q> (Driver).</note> to all
kingdoms of the earth, a reproach and a proverb,
a taunt and a curse, in all places whither
I drive them. And I will send among them
the sword, the famine and the pestilence, till
<pb n='240'/><anchor id='Pg240'/>
they be consumed from off the ground which
I gave to them.<note place='foot'>Hebrew adds
<hi rend='italic'>and to their fathers</hi>.</note>
</p>
</quote>

<p>
We cannot overestimate the effect upon Jeremiah
himself, and through him and Ezekiel upon the
subsequent history of Israel's religion, of this
drastic separation in 597 of the exiles of Judah
from the remnant left in the land. After suffering
for years the hopelessness of converting his
people, the Prophet at last saw an Israel of whom
hope might be dared. It was not their distance
which lent enchantment to his view for he gives
proof that he can descry the dross still among
them, despite the furnace through which they have
passed.<note place='foot'>xxix. 20, 15, 21-32, see pp.
<ref target="Pg245">245-247</ref>.</note> But
the banished were without doubt
the best of the nation, and now they had <q>dreed
their weird,</q> gone through the fire, been lifted out
of the habits and passions of the past, and
chastened by banishment&mdash;pensive and wistful as
exile alone can bring men to be.
</p>

<p>
We also have come out of the Great War with
the best of us gone, and feel the contrast between
their distant purity, <hi rend='italic'>out of great tribulation</hi>, and the
unworthiness of those who are left. But neither
to Jeremiah nor to any of his time was such inspiration
possible as we draw from our brave,
self-sacrificing dead. No confidence then existed
in a life beyond the grave. Jeremiah himself can
only <hi rend='italic'>weep for the slain of his people</hi>. His last vision
<pb n='241'/><anchor id='Pg241'/>
of them is of <hi rend='italic'>corpses strewn on the field like sheaves left
after the reaper which nobody gathers</hi>, barren of future
harvests; and the last word he has for them is,
<hi rend='italic'>they went forth and are not</hi>.<note place='foot'>ix.
22; x. 20.</note> But that separated and
distant Israel has for the Prophet something at
least of what the cloud of witnesses by which we
are encompassed means for us. There was quality
in them, quality purified by suffering and sacrifice,
more than enough to rally the conscience of the
nation from which they had been torn. For the
Prophet himself they released hope, they awoke
the sense of a future, they revived the faith that
God had still a will for His people, and that by
His patient Grace a pure Israel might be re-born.
</p>

<p>
If the vision of the Figs reveals the ethical
grounds of Jeremiah's new hope for Israel, his
Letter to the Exiles, XXIX. 1-23, discloses still
another ground on which that hope was based&mdash;his
clear and sane appreciation of the politics of
his time. And it adds a pronouncement of profound
significance for the future of Israel's religion, that
the sense of the presence of God, faith in His
Providence and Grace, and prayer to Him were
independent of Land and Temple.
</p>

<p>
From the subsequent fortunes of the exiles we
know what liberal treatment they must have received
from Nebuchadrezzar. They were settled
by themselves; they were not, as in Egypt of old,
<pb n='242'/><anchor id='Pg242'/>
hindered from multiplying; they were granted
freedom to cultivate and to trade, by which many
of them gradually rose to considerable influence
among their captors. All this was given to
Jeremiah to foresee and to impress upon the first
exiles. But it meant that their exile would be
long.
</p>

<p>
It is proof of the change in the Prophet's position
among his people<note place='foot'>See above, p.
<ref target="Pg236">236</ref>.</note> that his Letter was carried to
Babylon by two ambassadors from the King of
Judah to Nebuchadrezzar, and evidently with the
consent of Ṣedekiah himself. The text of the
Letter and of its title, originally no doubt from
Baruch's memoirs, has been considerably expanded,
as is clear not only from the brevity of
the Greek version, but from the superfluous
formulas and premature insertions which the
Hebrew and the Greek have in common. Following
others I have taken verses 5-7 as metre; and
if this is right we have a fresh instance of
Jeremiah's passing from metre to prose in the
same discourse. The metrical character of 5-7 is
not certain. Its couplets run on the following
irregular scheme of stresses: 3 + 4, 2 + 3, 3 + 3,
3 + 2 (?), 3 + 4, 3 + 4&mdash;the last line as so often
in a strophe being a long one.<note place='foot'>See above, p.
<ref target="Pg035">35</ref>.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
XXIX. 1. These are the words of the Letter
which Jeremiah sent from Jerusalem unto [the
<pb n='243'/><anchor id='Pg243'/>
remnant of] the elders of the exiles, [3] by the
hand of Eleasah, son of Shaphan, and
Gemariah, son of Hilḳiah, whom Ṣedekiah,
king of Judah, sent to Babylon unto the king
of Babylon saying, [4] Thus saith the Lord, the
God of Israel, unto the exiles whom I have
exiled from Jerusalem:<note place='foot'>This title has been
much expanded, as the briefer Greek shows,
and indeed much more than it shows. In 1 the addition of
<hi rend='italic'>priests and prophets</hi> is in view of 8 and 15 evidently wrong.
The Hebrew <hi rend='italic'>remnant of</hi> (before <hi rend='italic'>the
elders</hi>) which Greek lacks is difficult. It seems a later addition to the text
when many of the elders had died. Duhm's suggestion of a revolt of the early
exiles and the execution of many of the elders by Nebuchadrezzar
is imaginary. In verse 2 we have such a needless gloss
or expansion as later scribes were fond of making.</note>
</p>
<lg>
<l>Build houses and settle ye down,&nbsp;&nbsp;5</l>
<l>Plant gardens and eat of their fruit,</l>
<l>Take ye wives,&nbsp;&nbsp;6</l>
<l>And beget sons and daughters.</l>
<l>Take wives to your sons,</l>
<l>Give your daughters to husbands,</l>
<l>To beget sons and daughters,<note place='foot'>Greek omits this line.</note></l>
<l>And increase<note place='foot'>Hebrew adds <hi rend='italic'>there</hi>.</note>
and do not diminish.</l>
<l>And seek ye the peace of the land,<note place='foot'>Greek; Hebrew
<hi rend='italic'>city</hi>.</note>&nbsp;&nbsp;7</l>
<l>To the which I have banished you,</l>
<l>And pray for it unto the Lord,</l>
<l>For in her peace your peace shall be.</l>
</lg>
<pb n='244'/><anchor id='Pg244'/>
<p>
8. [For thus saith the Lord, Let not the prophets
in your midst deceive you, nor your diviners,
nor hearken to the dreams they (?) dream.
9. For falsehood are they prophesying unto you
in My Name; I have not sent them.]<note place='foot'>8 and 9
strike one as a premature reference to the prophets.</note>
10. For thus saith the Lord, So soon as seventy
years be fulfilled for Babylon, I will visit you
and establish My Word toward you by bringing
you<note place='foot'>Greek perhaps better <hi rend='italic'>your people</hi>,
for in seventy years the
elders addressed must have died out.</note> back to this place.
</p>
<lg>
<l>For I am thinking about you&mdash;&nbsp;&nbsp;11</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Rede of the Lord&mdash;</l>
<l>Thoughts not of evil but peace</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>To give you a Future and Hope.</l>
<l>Ye shall pray Me, and I will hear you,&nbsp;&nbsp;12</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>  Seek Me and find;&nbsp;&nbsp;13</l>
<l>If ye ask Me with all your heart</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>I shall be found of you.&nbsp;&nbsp;14</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
By omitting all of verses 12-14 that is not given
by the Greek we get these eight lines in approximately
Jeremiah's favourite Qinah-measure. The
Greek also lacks verses 16-20, which irrelevantly
digress from the exiles to the guilt and doom of
the Jews in Jerusalem, and which it is difficult to
think that Jeremiah would have put into a letter
to be carried by two of these same Jews.<note place='foot'>Duhm.</note> Verse
<pb n='245'/><anchor id='Pg245'/>
15 goes with 21-23,<note place='foot'>As even Lucian's version shows
in spite of its retaining 16-20.</note> a separate message to the
exiles which we shall treat in the following section.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<head>2. Prophets and Prophets. (XXIII. 9-32, XXVII-XXIX, etc.)</head>

<p>
Jeremiah's Letter to the Exiles had its consequences.
<emph>First</emph>, there was their claim to have
prophets of the Lord among themselves, which in
our text immediately follows the Letter as if part
of it, XXIX. 15, 21-23, but which is probably of
a somewhat later date.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
XXIX. 15. Because ye have said, The Lord
hath raised us up prophets in Babylon, [21] thus
saith the Lord concerning Ahab son of Kolaiah
and concerning Ṣedekiah son of Maaseiah,<note place='foot'>Greek lacks
the names of both the fathers, and also the last
clause of Hebrew, 21, <hi rend='italic'>which prophesy a lie to you
in My Name</hi>.</note>
Behold I am to give them into the hand of the
king of Babylon and to your eyes shall he
slay them. 22. And of them shall a curse be
taken up by all the exiles of Judah who are
in Babylon saying, <q>The Lord set thee like
Ṣedekiah and like Ahab, whom the king of
Babylon roasted<note place='foot'>This verb is a play on
the name of Ahab's father.</note> in the fire!</q> 23. Because they
have wrought folly in Israel and committed
adultery with their neighbours' wives, and
in My Name have spoken words which I
<pb n='246'/><anchor id='Pg246'/>
commanded them not. I am He who knoweth
and am witness&mdash;Rede of the Lord.
</quote>

<p>
And, <emph>second</emph>, another of the <q>prophets</q> among
the exiles sent to Jerusalem a protest against
Jeremiah's Letter, XXIX. 24-29.
</p>

<p>
This passage, especially in its concise Greek
form, which as usual is devoid of the repetitions
of titles and other redundant phrases in the
Hebrew text, bears the stamp of genuineness.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
XXIX. 24. And unto Shemaiah the Nehemalite
thou shalt say:<note place='foot'>In Hebrew follows in
25<hi rend='italic'>a</hi> a useless editorial addition.</note>
25<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>. Because thou hast sent in thine own name
a letter to Ṣephaniah, son of Maaseiah, the
priest,<note place='foot'>Hebrew precedes this with <hi rend='italic'>to all
the people which are in Jerusalem and</hi>, and follows it with <hi rend='italic'>and
to all the priests</hi>, additions very doubtful in view of verse 29. In II.
Kings xxv. 18 Ṣephaniah is <hi rend='italic'>second priest</hi>.</note> saying,
[26] The Lord hath appointed
thee priest, instead of Jehoiada the priest,
to be overseer in the House of the Lord for
every man that is raving and takes on himself
to be a prophet, that thou shouldest put him
in the stocks and in the collar. 27. Now therefore
why hast thou not curbed Jeremiah of
Anathoth, who takes on himself to prophesy
unto you? 28. Hath he not sent to us in Babylon
saying, <q>It<note place='foot'>The time of the captivity.</note>
is long! Build ye houses and
settle down, and plant gardens and eat their
fruit.</q>
<pb n='247'/><anchor id='Pg247'/>
29. And Ṣephaniah read this letter in the ears
of Jeremiah; [30] and the Word of the Lord came
to Jeremiah saying, [31] Send to the exiles saying:
Thus saith the Lord concerning Shemaiah
the Nehemalite, Because Shemaiah hath
prophesied unto you, although I did not send
him, and hath led you to trust in a lie; [32] therefore
thus saith the Lord, Behold I am about
to visit upon Shemaiah and upon his seed;
there shall not be a man to them in your
midst to see the good which I am going to
do you.<note place='foot'>Greek lacks the unnecessary remainder.</note>
</quote>

<p>
In one respect Jeremiah has not changed. His
denunciation of individuals who oppose the Word
of the Lord by himself is as strong as ever, and
still more dramatically than in the case of Shemaiah
it appears in his treatment of the prophets
within Jerusalem, who flouted his counsels of
subjection to Nebuchadrezzar, Chs. XXVII-XXVIII.
In this narrative or narratives (for the
whole seems compounded of several, perhaps
not all referring to the same occasion) the differences
between the Greek and Hebrew texts are
even more than usually great. The Greek again
attracts our preference by its freedom from superfluous
titles, repetitions and redundances, and is
probably nearer than the Hebrew to the original
of Baruch's Memoirs of the Prophet. But it is
<pb n='248'/><anchor id='Pg248'/>
obviously not complete, missing out clauses, the
presence of which is implied by subsequent
ones.<note place='foot'>The following are some details as to xxvii. The Hebrew verse
1 is not given by Greek; <hi rend='italic'>Jehoiakim</hi> is of course a copyist's error
for <hi rend='italic'>Ṣedekiah</hi>, as 3, 12, 20 and xxviii. 1 show. Greek lacks the
second clause of verse 5, all 7, several clauses of 8, one of 10, from
<hi rend='italic'>under</hi> onwards in 12, all 13, the first of 14,
<hi rend='italic'>now shortly</hi> in 16 (but adds <hi rend='italic'>I have not sent
them</hi>), all 17, the last half of 18, most of 19, much of 20, all 21, and two
clauses of 22.</note> The following is the substance of what
Baruch reports.
</p>

<p>
It was the fourth year of Ṣedekiah, 593, when
messengers from the neighbouring nations came
to Jerusalem to intrigue under Egyptian influence
for revolt against Babylon. Jeremiah was commanded
to make a yoke of bars and thongs, and
having put it on his neck to charge the messengers
to tell their masters&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
XXVII. 4. Thus saith the Lord of Hosts, the
God of Israel: [5] I have made the Earth by
My great power and Mine outstretched arm,
and I give it unto whom it seems right to
Me. 6. So now I have given all these lands<note place='foot'>Greek
<hi rend='italic'>the earth</hi>.</note>
into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar, king of
Babylon, to serve him,<note place='foot'>Hebrew <hi rend='italic'>my
servant</hi>.</note> and even the beasts
of the field to serve him. 8. And it shall be
that the nation and kingdom, which will not
put their neck into the yoke of the king of
Babylon, with the sword and with the famine<note place='foot'>Hebrew adds
<hi rend='italic'>pestilence</hi>.</note>
<pb n='249'/><anchor id='Pg249'/>
shall I visit them&mdash;Rede of the Lord&mdash;till they
be consumed at his hand (?). 9. But ye, hearken
ye not to your prophets, nor to your diviners,
nor to your dreamers,<note place='foot'>Greek; Hebrew
<hi rend='italic'>dreams</hi>.</note> nor to your soothsayers,
nor to your sorcerers, who say, <q>Ye
shall not serve the king of Babylon</q>; [10] for
they prophesy a lie unto you, to the result
of removing you far from your own soil.
11. But the nation which brings its neck into the
yoke of the king of Babylon and serves him,
I will let it rest on its own soil and it shall
till this and abide within it.
</quote>

<p>
This is followed by a similar Oracle to Ṣedekiah
himself, 12-15, and by another, 16-22, to the priests
concerning a matter of peculiar anxiety to them.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
16. Thus saith the Lord, Hearken ye not to the
words of the<note place='foot'>Greek; Hebrew
<hi rend='italic'>your</hi>.</note> prophets, who prophesy to you
saying, Behold, the vessels of the Lord's
House shall be brought back from Babylon;
for a lie are they prophesying to you. I have
not sent them.<note place='foot'>So adds
Greek.</note> 18. But if prophets they be,
and if the Word of the Lord is with them,
let them now plead with Me [that the vessels
left in the House of the Lord come not to
Babylon]. 19. Yet thus saith the Lord concerning
the residue of the vessels, [20] which the
king of Babylon did not take when he carried
<pb n='250'/><anchor id='Pg250'/>
Jeconiah into exile from Jerusalem, [22] unto
Babylon shall they be brought&mdash;Rede of the
Lord.
</quote>

<p>
The Hebrew text concludes with a prophecy of
the restoration of the vessels, which had it been
in the original the Greek translators could hardly
have omitted, and which is therefore probably a
<hi rend='italic'>post factum</hi> insertion. Not only, then, were the
sacred vessels taken away in 597 to remain in
Babylon, but such as were still left in Jerusalem
would also be carried thither. It is possible that
this address is now out of place and should follow
the next chapter, XXVIII, which deals only with
the vessels carried off in 597. Like the Hebrew
the Greek text gives XXVIII a separate introduction
which dates it in the fifth month of the fourth
year of Ṣedekiah, but omits the Hebrew statement
that the year was the same as that of the events
and words recorded in XXVII. The extent of
the differences between the Hebrew and Greek
continues to be at least as great as before,<note place='foot'>The
general differences in xxviii are: after <hi rend='italic'>the Lord</hi> Hebrew
adds <hi rend='italic'>of Hosts the God of Israel</hi> verses 2, 14; in 11 and 14 the
name <hi rend='italic'>Nebuchadnezzar</hi> as in xxvii; in 3, 4, 14, 16, 17 unnecessary
explanatory clauses or expansions; and throughout the title
<hi rend='italic'>the prophet</hi> to the names <hi rend='italic'>Jeremiah</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>Hananiah</hi> respectively.
Of all these the Greek is devoid; other differences are
marked in the notes to the translation.</note> as
a comparison will show between the Authorised
Version and the following rendering which adheres
to the Greek.
</p>

<pb n='251'/><anchor id='Pg251'/>

<p>
Jeremiah was still wearing his symbolic yoke
of wood and thongs in the Temple, when his prediction
that the sacred vessels would not be restored
was flatly contradicted and with as much
assurance that the contradiction was from the
God of Israel, as Jeremiah's assurance about his
own words. The speaker was like himself from
the country of Benjamin, from Gibeon near Anathoth,
Hananiah son of Azzur, who said&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
XXVIII. 2. Thus saith the Lord, I have broken<note place='foot'>The
prophetic perfect = <hi rend='italic'>I will break</hi>, verse 4.</note>
the yoke of the king of Babylon! 3. Within two
years I will bring back to this place the vessels
of the House of the Lord, [4] and Jeconiah and all
the exiles of Judah that went to Babylon; for I
will break the yoke of the king of Babylon.
5. Then said Jeremiah to Hananiah, before
the priests and all the people<note place='foot'>As in xxvii.
16 Greek puts the priests after the people.</note> standing in
the House of the Lord&mdash;yes, [6] Jeremiah said,<note place='foot'>Baruch
is not well accustomed to long sentences, therefore
repeats this clause (Duhm).</note>
Amen! The Lord do so! The Lord establish
the words thou hast prophesied, by bringing
back the vessels of the Lord's House and all
the exiles from Babylon to this place! 7. Only
hear, I pray thee, the Word of the Lord
which I am about to speak in thine ears and in
the ears of all the people. 8. The prophets who
have been before me and thee from of old,
<pb n='252'/><anchor id='Pg252'/>
they prophesied against many lands and
against great kingdoms of war [and of
famine (?) and pestilence].<note place='foot'>Greek lacks
the bracketed words; <hi rend='italic'>famine</hi> by changing one
letter of the Hebrew for <hi rend='italic'>evil</hi>.</note> 9. The prophet
who prophesies of peace (it is only) when the
word<note place='foot'>Hebrew adds <hi rend='italic'>of the
prophet</hi>.</note> comes to pass that the prophet is
known<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Recognised</hi>
or <hi rend='italic'>acknowledged</hi>.</note> whom in truth the Lord hath sent.
10. Then Hananiah<note place='foot'>Greek adds <hi rend='italic'>In
the sight of all the people</hi>; also gives the
plural <hi rend='italic'>bars</hi>.</note> took the bars off the neck
of Jeremiah and brake them. 11. And Hananiah
spake before all the people saying: Thus
saith the Lord, Even so will I break the yoke
of the king of Babylon [within two years]<note place='foot'>Greek
lacks these words.</note>
from off the necks of all the nations.
And Jeremiah went his way.
12. Then came the Word of the Lord to Jeremiah,
after Hananiah had broken the bars
from off his neck, saying, [13] Go tell Hananiah,
Thus saith the Lord: Thou hast broken the
bars of wood but I will<note place='foot'>So Greek; Hebrew
<hi rend='italic'>thou shalt</hi>.</note> make in their stead
bars of iron. 14. For thus saith the Lord, An
iron yoke have I put upon the necks of all
[these] nations, that they may serve the
king of Babylon. 15. And Jeremiah said to
<pb n='253'/><anchor id='Pg253'/>
Hananiah,<note place='foot'>Hebrew adds <hi rend='italic'>Hear
now Hananiah</hi>.</note> The Lord hath not sent thee, but
thou leadest this people to trust in a lie.
16. Therefore thus saith the Lord, Behold, I am
about to dispatch thee from off the face of
the ground&mdash;this year thou shalt die.
17. And he was dead<note place='foot'>Hebrew adds
<hi rend='italic'>that year</hi>.</note> by the seventh month.
</quote>

<p>
All praise to Baruch for his concise and vivid
report, and to the Greek translator who has reproduced
it! The editors of the Hebrew text
have diluted its strength.
</p>

<p>
With this narrative we are bound to take the
section of the Book entitled <hi rend='italic'>Of the Prophets</hi>, XXIII.
9-32. The text is in parts uncertain, and includes
obvious expansions. These removed, we can
fairly distinguish a continuous metrical form up
to 29, with the exception perhaps of 25-27. The
metre is sometimes irregular enough to raise
the suggestion<note place='foot'>By Giesebrecht.</note>
that the whole is rhetorical
prose, between which and metre proper it is
often hard, as we have seen, to draw the line.
But we have also learned how often and how
naturally irregular, when the subject requires it,
Jeremiah's metres tend to become. So I have
ventured, with the help of the Greek, to render
the whole as metre, in which form are parts beyond
doubt. Verses 18 and 30-32 are in prose,
and both, but more probably the former, may
<pb n='254'/><anchor id='Pg254'/>
be later additions, as are 19, 20, and clauses in
9, 10.
</p>

<p>
There is no reason against taking the remainder
as Oracles by Jeremiah himself. No dates are
given them; they probably come from various
stages of his ministry, for he early found out the
false prophets, and his experience of them and
their errors lasted to the end. But probably this
collection of the Oracles was made under Ṣedekiah;
that Baruch gathered it still later is not
so likely.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Of the prophets:&mdash;&nbsp;&nbsp;XXIII. 9</l>
<l>Broken my heart within me,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>All pithless my bones.</l>
<l>I'm become like a drunken man</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Like a wight overcome with wine.<note place='foot'>Hebrew
adds <hi rend='italic'>Before the Lord, yea before His holy words</hi>
(Greek <hi rend='italic'>before His glorious majesty</hi>). Both break the connection
and are unmetrical.</note></l>
<l>Of adulterers the land is full&nbsp;&nbsp;10</l>
<l>Their course it is evil,<note place='foot'>The couplet
here given by Hebrew and Greek is too long for
the verse, breaks the connection, and is apparently a copyist's
dittography expanded by quotation from ix. 2 (Duhm). But a
single line is needed. Helped by Greek, we might read <hi rend='italic'>and
because of these mourns</hi>.</note></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their might not right.</l>
<l>For prophet and priest alike&nbsp;&nbsp;11</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Are utterly godless.<note place='foot'>After Duhm.</note></l>
<pb n='255'/><anchor id='Pg255'/>
<l>E'en in My House their evil I find&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Rede of the Lord.</l>
<l>Therefore their way shall they have&nbsp;&nbsp;12</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>In slippery places,</l>
<l>Thrust shall they be into darkness<note place='foot'>So Syriac,
alone yielding a sound division of the lines.</note></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And fall therein,</l>
<l>When I bring calamity on them,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The year of their visitation.</l>
<l>In Samaria's prophets I saw the unseemly,&nbsp;&nbsp;13</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>By Baal they prophesied.<note place='foot'>Hebrew
and Greek add a line breaking metre and parallel.</note></l>
<l>In Jerusalem's prophets I see the horrible&mdash;&nbsp;&nbsp;14</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Adultery, walking in lies.</l>
<l>They strengthen the hands of ill-doers,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>That none from his wickedness turns.</l>
<l>To Me they are all like Sodom,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Like Gomorra her<note place='foot'>Jerusalem's
(?).</note> dwellers!</l>
<l>Therefore thus saith the Lord:<note place='foot'>Greek adds
<hi rend='italic'>of Hosts concerning the prophets</hi>.</note>&nbsp;&nbsp;15</l>
<l>Behold, I will feed them with wormwood,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And drug them with poison.<note place='foot'>Cornill
rejects this couplet, I think needlessly.</note></l>
<l>For forth from Jerusalem's prophets</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Godlessness starts o'er the land.</l>
<l>Thus saith the Lord of Hosts&nbsp;&nbsp;16</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Hearken not to the words of the prophets</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>They make them bubbles,<note place='foot'>So Greek,
cp. ii. 5, p. 92.</note></l>
<pb n='256'/><anchor id='Pg256'/>
<l>A vision from their hearts they speak,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Not from the mouth of the Lord.</l>
<l>Saying to the scorners of His<note place='foot'>Or <hi rend='italic'>My</hi>,
Erbt and Cornill.</note> Word&nbsp;&nbsp;17</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>Peace shall be yours;</q></l>
<l>To all who follow their stubborn hearts</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>No evil shall reach you!</q></l>
</lg>
<p>
18. [For who hath stood in the council of the
Lord and hath seen His Word? Who hath
attended and heard?]<note place='foot'>So Greek. Hebrew
<hi rend='italic'>feared and heard His word</hi>. These
clauses are not metrical and may be a later intrusion; which 19,
20 certainly are, for they find their proper place in xxx. 23, 24.</note>
</p>
<lg>
<l>I have not sent the prophets,&nbsp;&nbsp;21</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Of themselves they run.</l>
<l>I have not spoken to them,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>They do the prophesying.</l>
<l>If they had stood in My Council,&nbsp;&nbsp;22</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And heard My Words,</l>
<l>My people they would have been turning<note place='foot'>So Greek.</note></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>From<note place='foot'>Hebrew expands,
<hi rend='italic'>from their evil way and</hi>.</note> the wrong of their doings.</l>
<l>I am a God who is near&nbsp;&nbsp;23</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Not a God who is far.<note place='foot'>So Greek
affirmatively. Hebrew, by putting the couplet as
a question, confuses the meaning. To <hi rend='italic'>near</hi> it adds
<hi rend='italic'>Rede of the Lord</hi>.</note></l>
<l>Can any man hide him in secret&nbsp;&nbsp;24</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And I not see him?</l>
<pb n='257'/><anchor id='Pg257'/>
<l>Is it not heaven and earth that I fill?&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Rede of the Lord.</l>
<l>I have heard what the prophets say&nbsp;&nbsp;25</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Who preach in My Name,</l>
<l>Falsely saying, <q rend='pre'>I have dreamed,</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='post'>I have dreamed, I have
dreamed.</q><note place='foot'>So Duhm happily takes a third
repetition (for other cases of this kind, see vii. 4; xxii. 29)
instead of the senseless <hi rend='italic'>how long</hi> at the
beginning of the next verse.</note></l>
<l>Will the heart of the prophets turn,<note place='foot'>Giesebrecht's
happy emendation.</note>&nbsp;&nbsp;26</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Who prophesy lies?</l>
<l>And in their prophesying ... (?)<note place='foot'>So Greek.</note></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The deceit of their heart,</l>
<l>Who plan that My people forget My Name<note place='foot'>Greek
<hi rend='italic'>Law</hi>.</note>&nbsp;&nbsp;27</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Through the dreams they tell,</l>
<l>Just as their fathers forgot</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>My Name through Baal.</l>
<l>The prophet with whom is a dream&nbsp;&nbsp;28</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Let him tell his<note place='foot'>So Greek.</note> dream;</l>
<l>But he with whom is My Word,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>My Word let him speak in truth.</l>
<l>What has the straw with the wheat?<note place='foot'>Greek adds
<hi rend='italic'>so My words</hi>.</note></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>&mdash;Rede of the Lord&mdash;</l>
<l>My Word, is it not<note place='foot'>Hebrew adds
<hi rend='italic'>thus</hi>.</note> like fire&nbsp;&nbsp;29</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And the hammer that shatters the rock?</l>
</lg>
<p>
30. Therefore, Behold, I am against the prophets&mdash;Rede
of the Lord&mdash;who steal My Words
<pb n='258'/><anchor id='Pg258'/>
each from his mate. 31. Behold, I am against the
prophets who fling out their tongues and rede
a Rede.<note place='foot'>So lit. or <hi rend='italic'>call it a Rede</hi>;
<hi rend='italic'>fling out</hi> so two Greek versions,
Hebrew <hi rend='italic'>take</hi>.</note> 32. Behold, I am against the prophets
of false dreams who tell them and lead My
people astray by their falsehood and extravagance<note place='foot'>Zeph.
iii. 4.</note>&mdash;not
I have sent them or charged
them, nor of any profit whatsoever are they
to this people.<note place='foot'>In 31 and 32 Hebrew repeats
<hi rend='italic'>Rede of the Lord</hi>. The section
which follows can hardly be Jeremiah's.</note>
</p>
</quote>

<p>
We have now all the material available for
judgment upon Jeremiah's life-long controversy
with the other prophets. His message and theirs
were diametrically opposite. But both he and
they spoke in the name of the same God, the God
of their nation. Both were convinced that they
had His Mind. Both were sure that their respective
predictions would be fulfilled. Each repudiated
the other's claim to speak in the name of
their nation's God. With each it was an affair of
strong, personal convictions, which we may grant,
in the case of some at least of Jeremiah's opponents,
to have been as honest as his. At first sight it
may seem hopeless to analyse such equal assurances,
based apparently on identical grounds, with
the view of discovering psychological differences
between them; and as if we must leave the issue
<pb n='259'/><anchor id='Pg259'/>
to the course of events to which both parties confidently
appealed. Even here the decision is not
wholly in favour of the one as against the others.
For Jeremiah's predictions in the Name of the
Lord were not always fulfilled as he had shaped
them. The northern executioners of the Divine
Judgment upon Judah were not the Scythians as
he at first expected; and&mdash;a smaller matter&mdash;Jehoiakim
was not <hi rend='italic'>buried with the burial of an ass,
dragged and flung out from the gates of Jerusalem</hi>, but
<hi rend='italic'>slept with his fathers</hi>.<note place='foot'>xxii. 19;
II. Kings xxiv. 6; just as conversely Huldah's
prophecy that Josiah would <hi rend='italic'>be gathered to his fathers in peace</hi>,
II. Kings xxii. 20, was belied at Megiddo.</note> Yet these are only exceptions.
Jeremiah's prophesying was in substance vindicated
by history, while the predictions of the other
prophets were utterly belied. This is part of
Jeremiah's meaning when he says, <hi rend='italic'>Of no profit
whatsoever are they to this people</hi>.<note place='foot'>xxiii. 32,
repeating what he has frequently said already.</note>
</p>

<p>
What were the grounds of the undoubted difference?
On penetrating the similar surfaces of
Jeremiah's and the prophets' assurances we find
two deep distinctions between them&mdash;one moral
and one intellectual.
</p>

<p>
We take the moral first for it is the deeper.
Both Jeremiah and the prophets based their predictions
on convictions of the character of their
God. But while the prophets thought of Him
and of His relations to Israel from the level of that
<pb n='260'/><anchor id='Pg260'/>
tribal system of religion which prevailed throughout
their world, and upon that low level concluded
that Yahweh of Israel could not for any reason
forsake His own people but must avert from them
every disaster however imminent; Jeremiah was
compelled by his faith in the holiness and absolute
justice of God to proclaim that, however close and
dear His age-long relations to Israel had been and
however high His designs for them, He was by
His Nature bound to break from a generation
which had spurned His Love and His Law and
proved unworthy of His designs, and to deliver
them for the punishment of their sins into the
hands of their enemies.<note place='foot'>As Amos had
more strongly put it, <hi rend='italic'>You only have I known
of all the families of the earth, therefore I will visit upon you
all your iniquities</hi>, iii. 2.</note> <hi rend='italic'>What else can I do?</hi>
Jeremiah hears God say. The opposing prophets
reply, <hi rend='italic'>Not He!</hi> This is the ground of his charge
against them, that they plan to make the <hi rend='italic'>people
forget the Name</hi>, the revealed Nature and Character,
of God, just as <hi rend='italic'>their fathers forgat Him through
Baal</hi>,<note place='foot'>xxiii. 27.</note>
confusing His Nature with that of the lower, local
god.<note place='foot'>As we have seen; above, pp. <ref target="Pg076">76</ref>,
<ref target="Pg104">104</ref> f., <ref target="Pg137">137</ref>.</note>
This ethical difference between Jeremiah
and the prophets is clear beyond doubt; it was
profound and fundamental. There went with it
of course the difference between their respective
attitudes to the society of their time&mdash;on the one
<pb n='261'/><anchor id='Pg261'/>
side his acute conscience of the vices that corrupted
the people, on the other their careless temper
towards those vices. They would <hi rend='italic'>heal the hurt of
the daughter of my people lightly</hi>, saying <hi rend='italic'>it is well, it
is well when well it is not</hi>, and in their prophesying
there was no call to repentance.<note place='foot'>viii. 11; xxiii. 14, 17,
22, etc., etc.</note> Moreover,
though this may not have been true of all of them,
some both in Jerusalem and among the exiles were
<hi rend='italic'>partakers of other men's sins</hi>; for Jeremiah charges
them with the prevailing immoralities of the day&mdash;adultery
and untruth. Instead of turning Judah
from her sins, they were the promoters of the
godlessness that spread through the land.<note place='foot'>xxix. 23, xxiii. 14.</note>
Though we have only Jeremiah's&mdash;or Baruch's&mdash;word
for this, we know how natural it has ever
been for the adherents, and for even some of the
leaders, of a school devoid of the fundamental
pieties to slide into open vice. Jeremiah's charges
are therefore not incredible.
</p>

<p>
But the grounds of the difference between
Jeremiah and the other prophets were also intellectual.
Jeremiah had the right eye for events
and throughout he was true to it. Just as he tells
us how the will of God was sometimes suggested
to him by the sight of certain physical objects&mdash;the
almond-blossom that broke the winter of
Anathoth, the boiling caldron, or the potter at his
wheel&mdash;so the sight of that in which the physical
<pb n='262'/><anchor id='Pg262'/>
and spiritual mingled, the disposition and progress
of the political forces of his world, made clear to
him the particular lines upon which the ethically
certain doom of Judah would arrive. He had the
open eye for events and allowed neither that
horror of his people's ruin, of which he tells us his
heart was full, nor any other motive of patriotism,
nor temptations to the easier life that had surely
been his by flattery and the promise of peace to
his contemporaries, to blind him to the clear and
just reading of his times, to which God's Word
and his faith in the Divine character had opened
his vision. On the contrary the other prophets,
to take them at their best, were blinded by their
patriotism, blinded by it even after Carchemish
and when the grasp of Babylon was sensibly
closing upon Judah&mdash;even after the first captivity
and when the siege of Jerusalem could only end
in her downfall and destruction. Nothing proved
sufficient to open such eyes to the signs of the
times.
</p>

<p>
Making allowance, then, for the fact that we
depend for our knowledge of the controversy upon
the record of only one of the parties to it, and
imputing to the other prophets the best possible,
we are left with these results: that as proved by
events the truth was with Jeremiah's word and
not with that of his opponents, and that the causes
of this were his profoundly deeper ethical conceptions
of God working in concert with his unwarped
<pb n='263'/><anchor id='Pg263'/>
understanding of the political and military
movements of his time.
</p>

<p>
To this were allied other differences between
Jeremiah and the prophets who were against him.
</p>

<p>
Along with the priests they clung to tradition,
to dogma, to things that had been true and vital
for past generations but were no longer so for this
one, which turned exhausted truths into fetishes.
To all these he opposed <hi rend='italic'>the Word of the Living
God</hi>, Who spoke to the times and freely acted
according to the character and the needs of the
present generation.
</p>

<p>
Again, the other prophets do not appear to
have attached any conditions to their predictions;
these they delivered as absolute and final. In
contrast, not merely were Jeremiah's prophecies
conditional but the conditions were in harmony
with their fundamentally moral spirit.
His doctrine of Predestination was (as we have
seen) subject to faith in the Freedom of the Divine
Sovereignty, and therefore up to the hopeless last
he repeated his calls to repentance, so that
God might relent of the doom He had decreed,
and save His people and His land to each
other.
</p>

<p>
Further, despite his natural outbursts of rage
Jeremiah showed patience with his opponents,
the patience which is proof of the soundness of
a man's own convictions. He believed in <q>the
liberty of prophesying,</q>
</p>

<pb n='264'/><anchor id='Pg264'/>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>The prophet with whom is a dream</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Let him tell his dream,</l>
<l>And he with whom is My Word,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>My Word let him speak in truth!</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Jeremiah had no fear of the issue being threshed
out between them. The wheat would be surely
cleared from the straw.<note place='foot'>xxiii. 28, above, p.
<ref target="Pg257">257</ref>; cp. xxvii. 18.</note> That is a confidence
which attracts our trust. In the strength of it
Jeremiah was enabled to pause and reflect on the
apparently equal confidence which he encountered
in his opponents, and to give this every opportunity
to prove itself to him before he repeated his own
convictions. I cannot think, as many do, that his
words to Hananiah were sarcastic; and when
Hananiah broke the yoke on Jeremiah's shoulders,
and it is said, <hi rend='italic'>But Jeremiah went his way</hi>, this was
not in contempt but to think out the issue between
them.<note place='foot'>xxviii. 11, cp. xlii. 1-7.</note>
Nor do I feel sarcasm in his wish that his
opponents' predictions of the return of the sacred
vessels from Babylon might be fulfilled.<note place='foot'>xxviii. 6; above, p.
<ref target="Pg251">251</ref>.</note> His
brave calm words to the prophets and priests who
sought his life in the Temple in 604<note place='foot'>xxvi. 14, 15.</note> bear
similar testimony. All these are the marks of an honest,
patient and reflective mind which weighs opinions
opposite to its own.
</p>

<p>
Further still, Jeremiah had to his credit that
of which his opponents appear to have been
<pb n='265'/><anchor id='Pg265'/>
devoid. As we have seen no prophet was less
sure of himself, or more reluctant to discharge the
duties of a prophet. Everywhere he gives evidence
of being impelled by a force not his own
and against his will.<note place='foot'>See further,
<ref target="Lecture_VII">Lecture vii</ref>.</note> But the other prophets
show no sign of this accrediting reluctance. They
eagerly launch forth on their mission; <hi rend='italic'>fling about
their tongues, and rede a Rede</hi> of the Lord.<note place='foot'>xxiii. 31,
p. <ref target="Pg258">258</ref>.</note> They
give no impression of a force behind them.
Jeremiah says that <hi rend='italic'>they run of themselves</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>prophesy of themselves</hi>, they have not been
sent.<note place='foot'>xxiii. 21.</note> We still
keep in mind that we owe the accounts of them to
Jeremiah and Baruch, their opponents. But our
own experience of life enables us to recognise
the portraits presented to us, as of characters
found in every age: pushful men, who have no
doubts of their omniscience, but, however patriotic
or religious or learned, leave upon their contemporaries
no impression of their being driven
by another force than themselves, and whose
opinions either are belied by events, or melt into
the air.
</p>

<p>
One point remains. In answering Hananiah
Jeremiah adduced the example of the acknowledged
prophets of the past as being always
prophets of doom, so that the presumption was in
favour of those who still preached doom; yet he
allowed that if any prophet promised peace, and
peace came to pass, he also might be known as
<pb n='266'/><anchor id='Pg266'/>
genuine. That was sound history, and in the circumstances
of the day it was also sound sense.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<head>3. The Siege. (XXI, XXXII-XXXIV, XXXVII, XXXVIII.)</head>

<p>
History has no harder test for the character
and doctrine of a great teacher than the siege of
his city. Instances beyond the Bible are those of
Archimedes in the siege of Syracuse, 212 <hi rend='smallcaps'>B.C.</hi>,
Pope Innocent the First in that of Rome by Alaric,
417 <hi rend='smallcaps'>A.D.</hi>, and John Knox in that of St. Andrews
by the French, 1547. A siege brings the prophet's
feet as low as the feet of the crowd. He shares
the dangers, the duties of defence, the last crusts.
His hunger, and, what is still keener, his pity for
those who suffer it with him, may break his faith
into cowardice and superstition. But if faith
stands, and common-sense with it, his opportunities
are high. His powers of spiritual vision may
prove to be also those of political and even of
military foresight, and either inspire the besieged
to a victorious resistance, or compel himself, alone
in a cityful of fanatics, to counsel surrender.
A siege can turn a prophet or quiet thinker into
a hero.
</p>

<p>
The Old Testament gives us three instances&mdash;Elisha's
brave visions during the Syrian blockade
of Dothan and siege of Samaria; Isaiah, upon the
solitary strength of his faith, carrying Jerusalem
<pb n='267'/><anchor id='Pg267'/>
inviolate through her siege by the Assyrians; and
now a century later Jeremiah, with a more costly
courage, counselling her surrender to the Babylonians.
</p>

<p>
The records of the Prophet's activity and sufferings
during the siege are so curiously scattered
through the Book and furnished with such headlines
as to leave it clear that they were added at
different times and possibly from different sources.
Some of them raise the question whether or not
they are doublets.
</p>

<p>
Three, XXI. 1-10, XXXIV. 1-7, XXXVII. 3-10,
bear pronouncements by Jeremiah that the city
must surrender or be stormed and burned. Of
these the first and third each gives as the occasion
of the pronouncement it quotes, Ṣedekiah's mission
of two men to the Prophet. Several critics regard
these missions as identical. But can we doubt
that during that crisis of two years the distracted
king would send more than once for a Divine word?
And for this what moments were so natural as
when the Chaldeans were beginning the siege,
XXI. 4, and when they raised it, XXXVII. 5?
That one of the two messengers is on each occasion
the same affords an inadequate reason&mdash;and no
other exists&mdash;for arguing that both passages are but
differently telling the same story.<note place='foot'>Stade's combination
(<hi rend='italic'>ZATW</hi> 1892, 277 ff.) of xxi. 1, 2;
xxxvii. 4-10; xxi. 3-10; xxxvii. 11 ff. yields a contradiction&mdash;a
prayer for the raising of the siege (xxi. 1, 2) already raised (xxxvii.
5). Erbt avoids this by combining only xxi. 1, 2<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>; xxxvii. 6-10;
similarly Gillies (p. 309). But, as Cornill says, one cannot explain
how from this form the two accounts have risen. Older
critics (except Ewald) and Davidson, Giesebrecht, Peake,
Thomson, (196, 198) and Cornill refer the passages to different
occasions. Skinner leaves the question in suspense (259 n.).
Duhm disposes of xxxvii. 3-10 as a Midrash legend and xxi. 1-10
as <q>a free composition</q> upon it by another hand!</note> Nor have any
<pb n='268'/><anchor id='Pg268'/>
grounds been offered for identifying the occasion
of either passage with that of XXXIV. 1-7. Thus
we have three separate deliverances from Jeremiah
to the king, each with its own vivid phrases and
distinctive edge.
</p>

<p>
The first, XXI 1-10, was given as the Chaldeans
closed upon Jerusalem but the Jews were not yet
driven within the walls.<note place='foot'>Probably the
original tenor of verse 4, but the text is confused
by additions.</note> Ṣedekiah sent Pashḥur
and Ṣephaniah to inquire if by a miracle the Lord
would raise the siege. The grim answer came
that the Lord Himself would fight the besieged,
till they died of pestilence and the survivors were
slaughtered by Nebuchadrezzar&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>I<note place='foot'>Greek;
Hebrew <hi rend='italic'>he</hi>.</note> shall not spare
nor pity them</hi>&mdash;which is proof that this Oracle was
uttered before the end of the siege, when the
survivors were not slain but deported. The people
are advised to desert to the enemy&mdash;counsel which
we shall consider later.
</p>

<p>
The second, XXXIV. 1-7, records a pronouncement
unsought by the king but evoked from
<pb n='269'/><anchor id='Pg269'/>
Jeremiah by the progress of the Chaldean arms,
which had overrun all Judah save the fortresses
of Jerusalem, Lachish and Azekah. Its vivid
genuineness is further certified by its unfulfilled
promise of a peaceful death for Ṣedekiah. The
following is mainly after the Greek.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
XXXIV. 2<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>. Thus saith the Lord: This city shall
certainly be given into the hand of the king
of Babylon, and he shall take it and burn it
with fire. 3. And thou shalt not escape but
surely be taken and delivered into his hand;
and thine eyes shall look into his eyes, and
his mouth speak with thy mouth,<note place='foot'>Greek omits
this clause inadvertently. The proposed reversal
to <hi rend='italic'>thy mouth speak with his mouth</hi> (Giesebrecht, etc.) misses the
point; surely the captor would speak first.</note> and to
Babylon shalt thou come. 4. Yet hear the
Lord's Word, O Ṣedekiah, king of Judah!
5. Thus saith the Lord,<note place='foot'>Hebrew adds <hi rend='italic'>concerning
thee, thou shalt not die by the
sword</hi>.</note> In peace shalt thou die,
and as the burnings<note place='foot'>Of spices. Some Greek
versions read <hi rend='italic'>mournings</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>so
shall they mourn for thee</hi>.</note> for thy fathers who
reigned before thee so shall they burn for
thee, and with <q>Ah lord!</q> lament thee. I
have spoken the Word&mdash;Rede of the Lord.
</quote>

<p>
The miserable king, how much worse was in store
for him than even Jeremiah was given to foresee!
Duhm (to our surprise, as Cornill remarks) agrees
<pb n='270'/><anchor id='Pg270'/>
that the passage is from Baruch; but only in order
to support the precarious thesis that Baruch knew
nothing of Ṣedekiah's being afterwards blinded
and that the reports of this<note place='foot'>xxxix. 7; II.
Kings xxv. 7.</note> sprang from unfounded
rumour.
</p>

<p>
The third pronouncement to Ṣedekiah, XXXVII.
3-10,<note place='foot'>Verses 1, 2 either belonged originally to this section, and
mark it as from another source than, or different edition of,
Baruch's memoirs, or more probably were added by an editor as
necessary after the preceding sections (xxxv, xxxvi) from
Jehoiakim's reign.</note> was made when the king sent Jehucal and
Ṣephaniah to seek the Prophet's prayers, after the
Chaldeans had raised the siege in order to meet
the reported Egyptian advance to the relief of
Jerusalem.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
XXXVII. 7. Thus saith the Lord: Thus say ye to
the king of Judah who sent you to inquire of
Me,<note place='foot'>Greek reads <hi rend='italic'>say thou</hi>
and <hi rend='italic'>thee</hi> for <hi rend='italic'>me</hi>,
and omits <hi rend='italic'>you</hi>.</note> Behold, Pharaoh's army, which is coming
forth to help you, shall return to the land of
Egypt. 8. And the Chaldeans shall come back
and fight against this city and take it and burn
it with fire. 9. For<note place='foot'>So Greek.</note> thus saith the Lord: Deceive
not yourselves saying, The Chaldeans
shall surely go off from us; they shall not go.
10. Even though ye smote the whole host of the
Chaldeans that are fighting with you, and
but wounded men were left, yet should these
<pb n='271'/><anchor id='Pg271'/>
rise, each in his tent,<note place='foot'>Greek
<hi rend='italic'>place</hi>.</note> and burn this city with
fire.
</quote>

<p>
It is very remarkable how the spiritual powers of
the Prophet endowed him with these sound views
of the facts of his time, and of their eventualities
whether in the political or in the military sphere.
For nearly forty years he had foretold judgment
on his people out of the North: for eighteen at
least he had been sure that its instrument would
be Nebuchadrezzar and he had foreseen the first
deportation of the Jews to Babylonia. Now step
by step through the siege he is clear as to what
must happen&mdash;clear that the Chaldeans will invest
the city, clear when they raise the investment that
they will beat off the Egyptian army of relief and
return, clear that resistance to them is hopeless,
and will but add thousands of deaths by famine
and pestilence before the city is taken and burned
and its survivors carried into exile&mdash;all of which
comes to pass. But this political sagacity and
military foresight have their source in moral and
spiritual convictions&mdash;the Prophet's assurance of
the character and will of God, his faith in the
Divine Government not of a single nation but of
all the powers of the world, and his belief that a
people is saved and will endure for the service of
mankind, neither because of past privileges nor by
the traditions in which it trusts, nor by adherence
<pb n='272'/><anchor id='Pg272'/>
to dogmas however vital these have been to its
fathers, nor even by its passionate patriotism and
its stubborn gallantry in defence of land and
homes, but only by its justice, its purity, and its
obedience to God's will. These are the spiritual
convictions which alone keep the Prophet's eyes
open and his heart steadfast through the fluctuations
of policy and of military fortune that shake
his world, and under the agony of appearing to
be a traitor to his country and of preaching the
doom of a people whom he loves with all his soul.
</p>

<p>
The case of John Knox affords a parallel to
that of the Hebrew prophet. He told the garrison
and citizens of St. Andrews, when besieged by the
French, that <q>their corrupt life could not escape
punishment of God and that was his continued
advertisement from the time he was called to
preach</q> among them. <q>When they triumphed of
their victory (the first twenty days they had
many prosperous chances) he lamented and ever
said <q>They saw not what he saw!</q> When they
bragged of the force and thickness of their walls,
he said, <q>They should be but egg-shells!</q> When
they vaunted <q>England will rescue us!</q> he said,
<q>Ye shall not see them, but ye shall be delivered
into your enemies' hands and shall be carried to
a strange country!</q></q> that is France. All of which
came to pass, as with Jeremiah's main predictions.<note place='foot'>Knox's
<q>History of the Reformation in Scotland,</q> Bk. i.</note>
</p>

<pb n='273'/><anchor id='Pg273'/>

<p>
The second of Jeremiah's pronouncements
given above is followed by the story of the
besieged's despicable treatment of their slaves,
XXXIV. 8-22; based on a memoir by Baruch,
but expanded. Both the Hebrew and the shorter
Greek offer in parts an uncertain text, and add
this problem that their story begins with a
covenant to <hi rend='italic'>proclaim a Liberty</hi><note place='foot'>Cp.
<q>declare a Liberty of Tender Consciences,</q> Declaration
of Breda by Charles II.</note> for the Hebrew
slaves in general, while the words which they
attribute to Jeremiah limit it to the emancipation,
in terms of a particular law, of those slaves who
had completed six years of service (verse 14).<note place='foot'>A
possible solution is <q>that the emancipation was undertaken
in obedience to the neglected law, and that to make their action
even more effective ... they decided to emancipate all their
slaves without waiting till the legal term had expired</q> (Peake).
Yet it is also possible that the reference in verses 13, 14 to the
law, Deut. xv. 12, is due to an editor.</note>
But neither this nor the other and smaller uncertainties
touch the substance of the story.<note place='foot'>The chief differences
between Hebrew and Greek are: 8, Greek lacks <hi rend='italic'>all</hi>
and the senseless <hi rend='italic'>unto them</hi>; 9, Greek reads
<hi rend='italic'>so that no Jew should be a slave</hi>; 10, 11, for
Hebrew <hi rend='italic'>heard</hi> (R.V. <hi rend='italic'>obeyed</hi>),
Greek reads <hi rend='italic'>turned</hi>, omits the last two clauses of
10, all of 11 save the last and in 12, 13 <hi rend='italic'>from the Lord</hi>
and <hi rend='italic'>God of Israel</hi>; 14 reads <hi rend='italic'>six</hi>
for Hebrew <hi rend='italic'>seven</hi> and 15 <hi rend='italic'>they</hi> for
<hi rend='italic'>ye</hi> (twice); 16 omits <hi rend='italic'>and brought them
into subjection</hi>, 17, <hi rend='italic'>to his brother and every man</hi>,
18 all reference to the calf and its parts, 20, 21 <hi rend='italic'>and into
the hand of them that seek their life</hi> (twice).</note> As
the siege began the king and other masters of
<pb n='274'/><anchor id='Pg274'/>
slaves in Jerusalem entered into solemn covenant
to free their Hebrew slaves, obviously in order
to propitiate their God, and also some would
assert (though unsupported by the text) in order
to increase their fighting ranks; but when the
siege was raised they forced their freedmen back
to bondage: <q>a deathbed repentance with the
usual sequel on recovery.</q><note place='foot'>Peake.</note> This is the barest
exposure among many we have of the character
of the people with whom Jeremiah had to deal,
and justifies the hardest he has said of their
shamelessness.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
XXXIV. 17. Therefore thus saith the Lord: Ye
have not obeyed Me by proclaiming a Liberty
each for his countryman. Behold I am about
to proclaim for you a Liberty&mdash;to the sword,
to the famine and to the pestilence, and I will
set you a consternation to all kingdoms of the
earth.... 21. And Ṣedekiah, king of Judah,
and his princes will I give into the hands of
their foes, the king of Babylon's host that
are gone up from you. 22. Behold, I am about
to command&mdash;Rede of the Lord&mdash;and bring
them back to this city and they shall storm
and take it and burn it with fire, and the
townships of Judah will I make desolate and
tenantless.
</quote>

<p>
Are we not in danger of the guilt of a similar
perjury to the men who fought for us in the Great
<pb n='275'/><anchor id='Pg275'/>
War, and for whom we have not yet fulfilled all the
promises made to them by our governors?
</p>

<p>
About this time the ill-treatment of Jeremiah,
which had ceased on Ṣedekiah's accession, was
resumed. The narrative, or succession of narratives,
of this begins at XXXVII. 11, and
continues to XXXIX. 14, with interruptions in
XXXIX. 1, 2, 4-13. Save for a few expansions,
the whole must have been taken from Baruch's
memoirs. Except for the omission of XXXIX.
4-13, the differences of the Greek from the
Hebrew are unimportant, consisting in the usual
absence of repetitions of titles, epithets and
names.
</p>

<p>
The siege being raised, Jeremiah was going
out by the North gate of the city to Anathoth to
claim or to manage<note place='foot'>xxxvii. 12; the
phrase is obscure.</note> some property there, when
he was arrested by the captain of the watch, and
charged with deserting. He denied this, but was
taken to the princes, who flogged him and flung
him into a vault in the house of Jonathan, the
Secretary. After many days he was sent for by
the king who asked, <hi rend='italic'>Is there Word from the Lord?</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>There is</hi>, he replied, and, as if drumming a lesson
into a stupid child's head, repeated his message,
<hi rend='italic'>Thou shalt be delivered into the hand of the King of
Babylon</hi>. He asked what he had done to be
treated as he had been, and, by contrast, where
<pb n='276'/><anchor id='Pg276'/>
were the prophets who had said that the Babylonians
would not come to Judah&mdash;his irony was
not yet starved out of him!&mdash;and begged not to
be sent back to the vault. The king committed
him to the Court of the Guard, where at least he
was above ground, could receive visitors, and
was granted daily a loaf from the Bakers' Bazaar
while bread lasted in the city.<note place='foot'>xxxvii. 11-21.</note>
</p>

<p>
Yet through his bars he still defied his foes and
they were at him again, quoting to the king two
Oracles which he had uttered before and apparently
was repeating to those who resorted to
him in the Guard-Court.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
XXXVIII. 1. And Shephatiah, Mattan's son,
Gedaliah Pashḥur's son, Jucal Shelamiah's
son, and Pashḥur Malchiah's son,<note place='foot'>Greek
omits this last named.</note> heard the
words Jeremiah was speaking about the
people:<note place='foot'>So Greek: Hebrew
<hi rend='italic'>unto all the people</hi>.</note> [2]
<q>Thus saith the Lord, He that
abides in this city shall die by the sword, the
famine or the pestilence, but he that goes
forth to the Chaldeans shall live&mdash;his life
shall be to him for a prey but he shall live.</q><note place='foot'>Greek
lacks <hi rend='italic'>to him</hi> and Syriac the last clause.</note>
3. <q>Thus<note place='foot'>Greek <hi rend='italic'>For thus</hi>.</note>
saith the Lord: This city shall surely
be given into the hand of the king of Babylon's
host and they shall take it.</q>
</quote>

<p>
Verse 2 is rejected by Duhm and Cornill partly
<pb n='277'/><anchor id='Pg277'/>
on the insufficient ground that verses 2 and 3 have
separate introductions and therefore could have
had originally no connection. But in quoting
two utterances of the Prophet for their cumulative
effect it was natural to prefix to each his usual
formula. Duhm's and Cornill's real motive,
however, is their repugnance to admitting that
Jeremiah could have advised desertion from the
city. So Duhm equally rejects XXI. 9, of which
XXXVIII. 2 is but an abbreviation; while
Cornill seeks to save XXI. 9 by reading it as a
summons to the <emph>whole</emph> people to surrender and
so distinguishes it from XXXVIII. 2, advice <emph>to
individuals</emph> to desert. I fail to follow this distinction.
The terms used are as individual in
the one verse as in the other; if the one goes the
other must also. But need either go? Duhm's
view is that both are from a later period, when
there was no longer a native government in
Judah, reverence for the monarchy was dead,
and the common conscience of Jewry was not
civic but ecclesiastical! This is ingenious, but
far from convincing. There are no grounds
either for denying these verses to Jeremiah, or
for reading his advice <hi rend='italic'>to go forth to the Chaldeans</hi>
as meant otherwise than for the individual
citizens.
</p>

<p>
Was such advice right or wrong? The question
is much debated. The two German scholars just
quoted find it so wrong that they cannot think of
<pb n='278'/><anchor id='Pg278'/>
it as Jeremiah's. But in that situation and under
the convictions which held him, the Prophet could
not have spoken differently. He knew, and
soundly knew, not only that the city was doomed
and that her rulers who persisted in defending
her were senseless, if gallant, fanatics, but
also that they had forfeited their technical legitimacy.
To talk to-day of duty, civil or military,
to such a perjured Government does not even
deserve to be called constitutional pedantry, for
it has not a splinter of constitutionalism to support
it. Ṣedekiah held his vassal throne only by
his oath to his suzerain of Babylon and when he
broke that oath his legitimacy crumbled.<note place='foot'>See above, p.
<ref target="Pg232">232</ref>.</note> Of
right Divine or human there was none in a
government so forsworn and self-disentitled,
besides being so insane, as that of the feeble king
and his frantic masters, the princes. For Jeremiah
the only Divine right was Nebuchadrezzar's.
But to the conviction that Ṣedekiah and the
princes were not the lawful lords of Judah, we
must add the pity of the Prophet as he foresaw
the men, women and children of his people done
to useless death by the cruel illusions of their
illegitimate governors. Calvin is right, when,
after a careful reservation of the duties of private
citizens to their government at war, he pronounces
that <q>Jeremiah could not have brought better
<pb n='279'/><anchor id='Pg279'/>
counsel</q> to the civilians and soldiers of Jerusalem.<note place='foot'>Calvin's
discriminating remarks on xxxviii. 2, in No. cxlvii
of his prelections on the Book of Jeremiah, are well worth reading.
See, too, Peake (p. 24) and Skinner (261 ff.).</note>
And it is no paradox to say that the Prophet's
sincerity in giving such advice is sealed by his
heroic refusal to accept it for himself and resolution
to share to the end what sufferings the obstinacy
of her lords was to bring on the city. Nor, be it
observed, did he bribe his fellow citizens to
desert to the enemy by any rich promise. He
plainly told them that this would leave a man
nothing but bare life&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>his life for a prey</hi>.
</p>

<p>
It would, however, be most irrelevant to deduce
from so peculiar a situation, and from the Divine
counsels applicable to this alone, any sanction for
<q>pacificism</q> in general, or to set up Jeremiah as
an example of the duty of deserting one's government
when at war, in all circumstances and whatever
were the issues at stake. We might as well
affirm that the example of the man, who rouses
his family to flee when he finds their home
hopelessly on fire, is valid for him whose house
is threatened by burglars. Isaiah inspired resistance
to the Assyrian besiegers of Jerusalem
in his day with as Divine authority as Jeremiah
denounced resistance to the Chaldean besiegers
in his. Nor can we doubt that our Prophet
would have appreciated the just, the inevitable
revolt of the Maccabees against their pagan
<pb n='280'/><anchor id='Pg280'/>
tyrants, which is divinely praised in the Epistle
to the Hebrews as a high example of faith. It is
one thing to deny allegiance, as Jeremiah did, to
a government that had broken the oath on which
alone its rights were founded, and the keeping of
which was the sole security for <q>the stability of
the times.</q> It is another and very different thing
to refuse, on alleged grounds of conscience, to
follow one's government when it lifts the sword
against a people who have broken <emph>their</emph> oath,
and mobilises its subjects in defence of justice
and of the freedom of weaker nations, imperilled
by that perjury.
</p>

<p>
But the princes seem to have honestly believed
that Jeremiah was guilty of treason, and
said to the king&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
XXXVIII. 4. Let this man, we pray, be put to
death forasmuch as he weakens the hands
of the men of war left to the city and the
hands of all the people by speaking such
words to them, for this man is seeking not
the welfare of this people but the hurt.
5. And the king said, Behold he is in your
hand; for the king was not able to do anything
against them.<note place='foot'>So Greek. Hebrew
takes this clause as part of Ṣedekiah's
reply: <hi rend='italic'>the king is not able to do anything
against you</hi>.</note>
6. So they took Jeremiah and cast him into
the cistern of Malchiah the king's son, in the
Court of the Guard; and they let down Jeremiah
<pb n='281'/><anchor id='Pg281'/>
with cords. In the cistern there was
no water, only mire, and Jeremiah sank in
the mire.
</quote>

<p>
The story which follows is one of the fairest in
the Old Testament, XXXVIII. 7-13.<note place='foot'>Greek again
is devoid of the repetitions, etc., that overload
the Hebrew.</note> When no
others seem to have stirred to rescue the Prophet&mdash;unless
Baruch had a hand in what he tells
and is characteristically silent about it&mdash;Ebed-melech,
a negro eunuch of the palace, sought the
king where he then was<note place='foot'>Hebrew adds
<hi rend='italic'>sitting</hi>, an obvious intrusion (not in Greek),
for in the siege the king would hardly hold council in the
Benjamin-Gate.</note> and charged the princes
with starving Jeremiah to death.<note place='foot'>Greek reads
that he charged not <emph>the princes</emph> but <emph>the king</emph>.
The text of 9 is uncertain. Duhm thinks the original meant
that the princes wished Jeremiah's death so as to save bread.</note> The king at
once ordered him to take three<note place='foot'>Hebrew and versions
<hi rend='italic'>thirty</hi>, differing little from the Hebrew for
<hi rend='italic'>three</hi>, which is now generally read.</note> men and rescue
the Prophet. The thoughtful negro, perhaps
prompted by the women of the palace, procured
some rags and old clouts from a lumber room,
told Jeremiah to put them under his arm-pits to
soften the roughness of the ropes, and so drew
him gently from the mire and he was restored to
the Guard-Court. Ebed-melech had his reward
in the Lord's promise to save him from the men
<pb n='282'/><anchor id='Pg282'/>
whom he had made his foes by his brave rescue
of their prey.<note place='foot'>xxxix. 15-18.</note>
</p>

<p>
Once more, as we might expect, the restless
king sent for Jeremiah.<note place='foot'>xxxviii. 14-28;
Greek agrees with Hebrew save for its usual omissions as well as
<hi rend='italic'>secretly</hi>, 16. Both read <hi rend='italic'>the third entry of
the Lord's House</hi>, which some, by adding a letter, would change
to <hi rend='italic'>entry of the Shalishim</hi> or <hi rend='italic'>guards</hi>;
unnecessarily, as Haupt shows.</note> Shaken by his terrible
experiences the Prophet, before he would answer,
asked if the king would put him to death for his
answer or act on his advice. The king swore
not to hand him over to the princes; so Jeremiah
promised that if Ṣedekiah would give himself
up to the Chaldeans he and his house would be
spared and the city saved. The king&mdash;it is
another credible trait in this weak character&mdash;feared
that the Chaldeans would deliver him to
the mockery of those Jews who had already
deserted to them. Jeremiah sought to reassure
him, again urged him to surrender, and then
burst out with the vision&mdash;an extraordinarily
interesting phase of prophetic ecstasy&mdash;of another
mockery which the king would suffer from his
own women if he did not yield but waited to be
taken captive.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
XXXVIII. 21. But if thou refuse to go forth this
is the thing the Lord has given me to see:
22. Behold all the women, that are left in the
<pb n='283'/><anchor id='Pg283'/>
king of Judah's house,<note place='foot'>After the
deportation of 597.</note> brought forth to the
princes of the king of Babylon and saying,
</p>
<lg>
<l>They set thee on and compelled thee,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The men of thy peace;</l>
<l>Now they have plunged thy feet in the swam</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>They turn back from thee!<note place='foot'>So Greek;
Hebrew reads <hi rend='italic'>thy feet are plunged</hi>, and omits
<hi rend='italic'>from thee</hi>; 23 is a late expansion.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
The verse is in Jeremiah's favourite measure,
and its figures spring immediately from his experience.
The mire can hardly have dried on
him, into which he had been dropped, but at
least his friends had pulled him out of it; the
king had been forced into far deeper mire by
his own counsellors, and they were leaving him
in it!
</p>

<p>
The nervous king jibbed from the vision without
remark and begged Jeremiah not to tell what had
passed between them, but, if asked, to say that
he had been supplicating Ṣedekiah not to send
him back to the house of Jonathan; which answer
the Prophet obediently gave to the inquisitive
princes and so quieted them: <hi rend='italic'>the matter was not
perceived</hi>. He has been blamed for prevaricating.
On this point Calvin is as usual candid and sane.
<q>It was indeed not a falsehood, but this evasion
cannot wholly be excused. The Prophet had an
honest fear; he was perplexed and anxious&mdash;it
<pb n='284'/><anchor id='Pg284'/>
would be better to die at once than be thus
buried alive in the earth.... Yet it was a kind
of falsehood. He confesses that he did as the
king charged him and there is no doubt that he
had before him the king's timidity.... He cannot
be wholly exempted from blame. In short, we
see how even the servants of God have spoken
evasively when under extreme fear.</q> The prophets
were <hi rend='italic'>men of like passions with ourselves</hi>. By now
Jeremiah had aged, and was strained by the
flogging, the darkness, the filth and the hunger
he had suffered. Can we wonder at or blame
him? But with what authenticity does its frankness
stamp the whole story!
</p>

<p>
With most commentators I have treated Ch.
XXXVIII as the account of a fresh arrest of
Jeremiah and a fresh interview between him and
Ṣedekiah. I see, however, that Dr. Skinner takes
the whole chapter to be <q>a duplication.</q><note place='foot'>Pp.
258-9 n., thus exceeding Steuernagel's and Buttenwieser's
readings of parts of it as a variant of xxxvii.</note> He considers
it a general improbability that two such
interviews, as XXXVII. 17-21 and XXXVIII.
14-27 relate, <q>should have taken place in similar
circumstances within so short a time.</q> Yet the
king was just the man to appeal to the Prophet
time after time during the siege. The similarities
in the two stories are natural because circumstances
were more or less similar at the various
stages of such a siege; but the differences are
<pb n='285'/><anchor id='Pg285'/>
more significant. The vivid details of XXXVIII
attest it as the account of an event and of sayings
subsequent to those related in XXXVII. The
Prophet's precaution, before he would answer, in
getting a pledge that he would not be put to
death nor handed over to the princes, as he had
already been, and his consent for Ṣedekiah's sake,
as well as for his own, to prevaricate to the
princes are features not found in the other reports
of such interviews, but intelligible and
natural after the terrible treatment he had
suffered. Dr. Skinner, too, admits that the two
accounts may be read as of different experiences
of the Prophet, <q>if we can suppose that the
offence with which he is charged in XXXVIII.
1 ff. could have been committed while he was a
prisoner in the court of the guard;</q> but this
appears to Dr. Skinner as <q>hardly credible.</q> Yet
the incidents related in XXXII. 6-15 show not
only that it is credible but that it actually
happened. In the East such imprisonment does
not prevent a prisoner, though shackled, from
communicating with his friends and even with
the gaping crowd outside his bars, as I have seen
more than once.
</p>

<p>
In the Court of the Guard Jeremiah remained
till the city was taken.<note place='foot'>xxxviii.
28.</note> He regained communication
with his friends; and it is not surprising
<pb n='286'/><anchor id='Pg286'/>
to have as from this time several sayings by him,
or to discover from them that his heart, no longer
confined to reiterating the certain doom of the
city, was once more released to the hope of a
future for his people, hope across which the
shadow of doubt appears to have fallen but once.
His guard-court prophecies form part of that
separate collection, Chs. XXX-XXXIII, to which
the name The Book of Hope has been fitly given.
Of these chapters XXX and XXXI, without
date, imply that the city has already fallen and
the exile of her people is complete. But XXXII
and XXXIII are assigned to the last year of the
siege and to the Prophet's confinement to the
guard-court. There is now general agreement
that XXXII. 1-5 (or at least 3-5) are from a later
hand, which correctly dates the story it introduces
but attributes Jeremiah's imprisonment to
Ṣedekiah instead of to the princes, and even
seems to confound Ṣedekiah with Jehoiachin;
and <emph>second</emph> that the story itself, of a transaction
between Jeremiah and his cousin regarding some
family property, is genuine, dictated by the
Prophet to Baruch before or after the end of
the siege. Some reject as later all the rest of the
chapter: a long prayer by Jeremiah and the
Lord's answer to it, both of which are full of
deuteronomic phrases. Yet that an editor should
have made so large an addition to the book
without genuine material to work from is hardly
<pb n='287'/><anchor id='Pg287'/>
credible; while it is characteristic of Jeremiah
to have fallen into the doubt his prayer reveals,
and this doubt would naturally be followed by a
Divine answer. But such original elements it is
not possible to discriminate exactly from the expansions
by which they have been overlaid.<note place='foot'>Duhm and
Cornill take as original only 6-15; Giesebrecht
reasonably adds 16, <hi rend='italic'>Ah Lord Yahweh</hi> in 17, 24, 25, and in the
main 26-44, from which probably more deductions should be
made than he makes. Gillies (270 ff.) takes 16-25 as later reflections
on a prayer by Jeremiah, 24-41 as editorial, 42-44 as
bringing us back to the actual situation. This is safer than
Peake's distinction of 16, 24-26, 36-44 as genuine (slightly
qualified by his notes). Hebrew and Greek throughout are the
same, save for the usual Greek omissions, and these are more
in the narrative 1-15 (especially 5<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>,
11<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>, 14 <hi rend='italic'>these deeds</hi> with
<hi rend='italic'>it</hi> for <hi rend='italic'>them</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>they</hi>, while in 8 for Hebrew <hi rend='italic'>the redemption is
thine</hi> it has <hi rend='italic'>thou art the elder</hi>) than in the prayer and the
divine answer (30<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>, 36 <hi rend='italic'>captivity</hi>
for <hi rend='italic'>pestilence</hi>, 41 <hi rend='italic'>visit</hi> for
<hi rend='italic'>rejoice over</hi>). In 6 for Hebrew <hi rend='italic'>me</hi>
Greek has <hi rend='italic'>Jeremiah</hi>, but confirms the 1st person in 8, 9-13,
16, 25, and in 26 has <hi rend='italic'>me</hi> for Hebrew
<hi rend='italic'>Jeremiah</hi>. Greek, too, has some of its unusual
surplus: 8 <hi rend='italic'>Shallum</hi>, 12 <hi rend='italic'>son of</hi>,
19 ὁ θεος ὁ μέγας ὁ παντοκράτωρ καὶ μεγαλώνυμος Κύριος,
25 <hi rend='italic'>and I wrote the deed and sealed it</hi>,
33<hi rend='italic'>b</hi> <hi rend='italic'>still</hi>, 43
<hi rend='italic'>again</hi>.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
XXXII. 6. And Jeremiah said, The Word of
the Lord came to me saying, [7] Behold, Hanamel
son of Shallum thine uncle is coming to thee
to say, Buy thee my field in Anathoth, for
thine is the right of redemption to buy it.
8. And Hanamel son of my uncle came to me in
the guard-court and said, Buy my field that is
<pb n='288'/><anchor id='Pg288'/>
Anathoth, for the right of inheritance is thine
and thine the redemption; buy it for thyself.
Then I knew that it was the Lord's Word.
9. So I bought the field from Hanamel mine
uncle's son and weighed to him seventeen
silver shekels. 10. And I subscribed the deed
and sealed it and took witnesses, weighing the
money in the balances. 11. And I took the deed
of sale, both that which was sealed and that
which was open,<note place='foot'>The custom was to have
one copy open for reference, and one sealed for confirmation
if the open one should be disputed. To
<hi rend='italic'>sealed</hi> Hebrew adds
<hi rend='italic'>the injunction and conditions</hi>.</note>
[12] and I gave it to Baruch son
of Neriah, son of Maḥseiah, in the sight of
Hanamel mine uncle's son, and in sight of
the Jews sitting in the guard-court. 13. And in
their sight I charged Baruch, saying, [14] Thus
saith the Lord of Hosts: Take this deed of sale
which is sealed, and this deed which is open,
and put them in an earthen vessel that they
may last many days. 15. For thus saith the Lord,
Houses and fields and vineyards shall yet
again be bought in this land.
16. Now after I had given the deed of sale to
Baruch, Neriah's son, I prayed to the Lord
saying, Ah Lord ... (?) [24] behold the mounts;
they are come to the city to take it, and the
city shall be given into the hands of the
Chaldeans who are fighting against it, because
of the sword and the famine and the pestilence;
<pb n='289'/><anchor id='Pg289'/>
and what Thou hast spoken is come to
pass, and, lo, Thou art seeing it. 25. Yet Thou
saidst to me, Buy thee the field for money, so I
wrote the deed and sealed it and took witnesses&mdash;whereas
the city is to be given into
the hands of the Chaldeans!
</quote>

<p>
The tone of the expostulating Jeremiah is here
unmistakable; and (as I have said) a Divine
answer to his expostulations must have been given
him, though now perhaps irrecoverable from
among the expansions which it has undergone,
verses 26-44. Two things are of interest: the
practical carefulness of this great idealist, and the
fact that the material basis of his hope for his
country's freedom and prosperity was his own
right to a bit of property in land. Let those observe,
who deny to such individual rights any
communal interest or advantage. Jeremiah at
least proves how a small property of his own may
help a prophet in his hope for his country and
people.
</p>

<p>
All this is followed in Ch. XXXIII by a series
of oracles under the heading <hi rend='italic'>The Word of the Lord
came to Jeremiah a second time while he was still shut
up in the guard-court</hi>. Because verses 14-26 are
lacking in the Greek and could not have been
omitted by the translator had they been in the
original text, and because they are composed
partly of mere echoes of Jeremiah and partly of
promises for the Monarchy and Priesthood not
<pb n='290'/><anchor id='Pg290'/>
consonant with his views of the institutions of
Israel, they are very generally rejected. So are
2 and 3 because of their doubtful relevance and
their style, that of the great prophet of the end of
the Exile. The originality of 1 and 4-13 has also
been denied. The question is difficult. But there
is no reason to doubt that the editor had good
material for the data in 1, or that under the Hebrew
text, which as it stands in 4, 5 is impossible<note place='foot'>The
numerous emendations are purely conjectural; the least
unsatisfactory being Cornill's: <hi rend='italic'>The houses ... shall be torn
down against which the Chaldeans are coming to fight with
mounds and sword and to fill with the corpses of men whom I
have smitten in my wrath</hi>, etc.</note> and
throughout 6-13 has been much expanded, there is
something of Jeremiah's own. Verses 4 and 5
reflect the siege in progress, though if the date
in verse 1 be correct we must take <hi rend='italic'>torn down</hi> as
future. In 6-13 are promises of the restoration
of the ruined city, of peace and stability, of the
return of the exiles both of Judah and Israel and of
their forgiveness; Jerusalem shall again be a joy,
and the voices of joy, of the bridegroom and bride,
and of worship in the Temple, shall again be heard;
shepherds and their flocks shall be restored
throughout Judah and the Negeb. It would be
daring to deny to the Prophet the whole of this
prospect. The city was about to be ruined, its
houses filled with dead; the land had already been
ravaged. His office of doom was discharged; it is
<pb n='291'/><anchor id='Pg291'/>
not unnatural to believe that his great soul broke
out with a vision of the hope beyond for which
he had taken so practical a pledge. That is all
we can say; some of the details of the prospect
can hardly be his.<note place='foot'>One may
eliminate the few words not found in Greek, and
naturally suspect the liturgical clause in 11. Some take 13 as a
late expansion of 12.</note>
</p>

<p>
Jerusalem fell at last in 586 and Jeremiah's imprisonment
in the guard-court was over.<note place='foot'>xxxviii. 28.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<head>4. And After. (XXX, XXXI, XXXIX-XLIV.)</head>

<p>
There are two separated accounts of what befel
Jeremiah when the city was taken. Ch. XXXIX.
3, 14 tells us that he was fetched from the guard-court
by Babylonian officers,<note place='foot'>Verse 14 follows
directly on verse 3. The statement that
Nebuṣaradan was one of them is in verse 13 which belongs to
the very late section, 4-13, lacking in the Greek.</note> and given to
Gedaliah, the son of his old befriender Ahikam,
<hi rend='italic'>to be taken home</hi>.<note place='foot'>Hebrew:
lit. <hi rend='italic'>to the house</hi>; Greek omits.</note>
At last!&mdash;but for only a brief
interval in the life of this homeless and harried
man. When a few months later Nebuṣaradan
arrived on his mission to burn the city and deport
the inhabitants Jeremiah is said by Ch. XL to
have been carried off in chains with the rest of
<pb n='292'/><anchor id='Pg292'/>
the captivity as far as Ramah, where, probably on
Gedaliah's motion, Nebuṣaradan released him and
he joined Gedaliah at Miṣpah.<note place='foot'>Either Neby
Samwîl or Tell-en-Naṣb, both a few miles north
of Jerusalem. The above exposition takes xxxix. 3, 14 and xl.
1-6 as supplementary. But some read them as variants of the
same episode, debating which is the more reliable. For a full
discussion see Skinner, pp. 272 ff.</note>
</p>

<p>
It is unfortunate that we take our impressions
of Nebuchadrezzar from the late Book of Daniel
instead of from the contemporary accounts of his
policy by Jeremiah, Baruch and Ezekiel. A proof
of his wisdom and clemency is here. While deporting
a second multitude to Babylonia in the
interests of peace and order, he placed Judah
under a native governor and chose for the post a
Jew of high family traditions and personal character.
All honour to Gedaliah for accepting so
difficult and dangerous a task! He attracted those
Jewish captains and their bands who during the
siege had maintained themselves in the country,<note place='foot'>Hebrew,
<hi rend='italic'>the forces</hi> (Greek, <hi rend='italic'>the force</hi>)
<hi rend='italic'>in the field</hi>.</note>
and advised them to acknowledge the Chaldean
power and to cultivate their lands, which that year
fortunately produced excellent crops. At last
there was peace, and the like-minded Governor
and Prophet must together have looked forward
to organising in Judah the nucleus at least of a
restored Israel.
</p>

<p>
To this quiet interval, brief as it tragically
<pb n='293'/><anchor id='Pg293'/>
proved, we may reasonably assign those Oracles
of Hope which it is possible to recognise as
Jeremiah's among the series attributed to him in
Chs. XXX, XXXI. No chapters of the book
have been more keenly discussed or variously
estimated.<note place='foot'>The oscillations of this controversy have been recently so
fully recounted (by Cornill and Peake) that it is unnecessary to
repeat them here.</note> Yet at least there is agreement that
their compilation is due to a late editor who has
arranged his materials progressively so that the
whole is a unity;<note place='foot'>Whether the datum xxx. 2, that Jeremiah was
commanded by the Lord to write the words spoken to him in a book, is
historical, is uncertain. It is not impossible that as he had been
moved to write down his Oracles of doom (xxxvi) he should
now be similarly advised about these later Oracles of hope.
The rejection of xxx. 2, by most critics, seems to me rash.</note>
that many of these materials
are obviously from the end of the exile in the
style then prevailing; but that among them are
genuine Oracles of Jeremiah recognisable by their
style. These are admitted as his by the most drastic
of critics. It is indeed incredible that after such
a crisis as the destruction of the Holy City and
the exile of her people, and with the new situation
and prospect of Israel before him, the Prophet
should have had nothing to say. And the most
probable date for such utterances of hope as we
have now to consider is not that of his imprisonment
but the breathing-space given him after
<pb n='294'/><anchor id='Pg294'/>
586, when the Jewish community left in Judah
made such a promising start.<note place='foot'>This in answer to Rothstein (Kautzsch's
<q>Heilige Schrift des A. T.,</q> 754), whose upper date for them <emph>after</emph>
597 is too early, and to Gillies (p. 238) who refers them to the Prophet's
imprisonment.</note>
</p>

<p>
From its measure and vivid vision the first
piece might well be Jeremiah's; but it uses Jacob,
the later literature's favourite name for Israel,
which Jeremiah does not use, and (in the last two
verses) some phrases with an outlook reminiscent
of the Second Isaiah. The verses describe a day
when the world shall again be shaken, but out of
the shaking Israel's deliverance shall come.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>[The sound of trembling we hear,&nbsp;&nbsp;XXX. 5</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Dread without peace.</l>
<l>Enquire now and look ye,&nbsp;&nbsp;6</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>If men be bearing?</l>
<l>Why then do I see every man<note place='foot'>Hebrew adds the gloss
<hi rend='italic'>like a bearing woman</hi>.</note></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>With his hands on his loins?</l>
<l>All faces are changed, and</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Livid become.<note place='foot'>So Greek,
reading היו for הוי.</note></l>
<l>For great is that day,&nbsp;&nbsp;7</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>None is there like it,</l>
<l>With a time of trouble for Jacob.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Yet out of it saved shall he be.</l>
<l>It shall come to pass on that day&mdash;&nbsp;&nbsp;8</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Rede of the Lord&mdash;</l>
<pb n='295'/><anchor id='Pg295'/>
<l>I will break their<note place='foot'>So Greek, Hebrew
<hi rend='italic'>thy</hi>.</note> yoke from their<note place='foot'>So Greek,
Hebrew <hi rend='italic'>thy</hi>.</note> neck,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their<note place='foot'>So Greek, Hebrew
<hi rend='italic'>thy</hi>.</note> thongs I will burst;</l>
<l>And strangers no more shall they serve,<note place='foot'>After the Greek.</note></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>But serve the Lord their God,&nbsp;&nbsp;9</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And David their king,</l>
<l>Whom I will raise up for them.]</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
The next piece is more probably Jeremiah's, as
even Duhm admits; verses 10 and 11 which precede
it are not given in the Greek.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Healless to me is thy ruin,&nbsp;&nbsp;12</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Sick is thy wound,</l>
<l>Not for thy sore is remede,&nbsp;&nbsp;13</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>No closing (of wounds) for thee!</l>
<l>Forgot thee have all thy lovers,&nbsp;&nbsp;14</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Thee they seek not.</l>
<l>With the stroke of a foe I have struck thee,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>A cruel correction.</l>
<l>Why criest thou over thy ruin,&nbsp;&nbsp;15</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Thy healless pain?</l>
<l>For the mass of thy guilt, thy sins profuse</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Have I done to thee these.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
If these Qînah quatrains are not Jeremiah's,
some one else could match him to the letter and
the very breath. They would fall fitly from his
lips immediately upon the fulfilment of his people's
doom. Less probably his are the verses which
follow and abruptly add to his stern rehearsal of
<pb n='296'/><anchor id='Pg296'/>
judgment on Judah the promise of her deliverance,
even introducing this with a <hi rend='italic'>therefore</hi> as if
deliverance were the certain corollary of judgment&mdash;a
conclusion not to be grudged by us to
the faith of a later believer; for it is not untrue
that the sinner's extremest need is the occasion
for God's salvation.<note place='foot'>Driver.</note> Yet the sudden transition
feels artificial, and lacks, be it observed, what
we should expect from Jeremiah himself, a call to
the doomed people to repent. Note, too, the
breakdown of the metre under a certain redundancy,
which is not characteristic of Jeremiah.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>[Therefore thy devourers shall all be devoured,&nbsp;&nbsp;16</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And all thine oppressors.</l>
<l>All shall go off to captivity;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Thy spoilers for spoil shall be</l>
<l>And all that upon thee do prey, I give for prey.</l>
<l>For new flesh I shall bring up upon thee,&nbsp;&nbsp;17</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>From thy wounds I shall heal thee;<note place='foot'>Hebrew
adds <hi rend='italic'>Rede of the Lord</hi>.</note></l>
<l>Outcast they called thee, O Ṣion,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Whom none seeketh after.]</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
The rest of the chapter is even less capable of
being assigned to Jeremiah.
</p>

<p>
More of Jeremiah's own Oracles are readily
recognised in Ch. XXXI. I leave to a later
lecture the question of the authenticity of that on
The New Covenant and of the immediately preceding
<pb n='297'/><anchor id='Pg297'/>
verses;<note place='foot'><ref target="Lecture_VIII">Lecture
viii</ref>.</note> while the verses which close the
chapter are certainly not the Prophet's. But I
take now the rest of the chapter, verses 1-28.
The first of these may be editorial, the link by
which the compiler has connected Chs. XXX
and XXXI; yet there is nothing to prevent us
from hearing in it Jeremiah himself.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
XXXI. 1. At that time&mdash;Rede of the Lord&mdash;I
shall be God to all the families<note place='foot'>Greek,
<hi rend='italic'>family</hi>.</note> of Israel,
and they shall be a people to Me.
</quote>

<p>
A poem follows which metrically and in substance
bears every mark of being Jeremiah's.
The measure is his favourite Qînah, and the
memory of the Lord's ancient love for Israel,
which had stirred the youth of the Prophet,<note place='foot'>iii. 6 f.</note> revives
in his old age and is the motive of his
assurance that Israel will be restored. It is of
Ephraim as well as of Judah that he thinks, indeed
of Ephraim especially. We have seen how the
heart of this son of Anathoth-in-Benjamin was
early drawn to the exiles from that province on
which the northward windows of his village
looked out.<note place='foot'>See p. <ref target="Pg072">72</ref>.</note>
Now once more he was in Benjamin's
territory, at Ramah and at Miṣpah, with
the same northward prospect. Naturally his
heart went out again to Ephraim and its banished
folk. Of the priestly tribe as Jeremiah's family
were, their long residence in the land of Benjamin
<pb n='298'/><anchor id='Pg298'/>
must have infected them with Benjamin's sense
of a closer kinship to Ephraim, the son of Joseph,
the son of Rachel, than to Judah, the son of Leah.
And there was, in addition, the influence of neighbourhood.
If blood be thicker than water it is
equally true that watered blood is warmed to
affection by nearness of locality and closeness of
association.<note place='foot'>Cornill dates the poem, <q>surely,</q>
from the earliest stage of Jeremiah's prophetic career; but
both its late place in the Book
and the reasons given above argue strongly for a date at Miṣpah
under Gedaliah.</note>
</p>

<p>
It is questionable whether the opening couplet
quotes the deliverance of Israel from Egypt as a
precedent for the future return of the northern
tribes from captivity, described in the lines that
follow; or whether this return is at once predicted
by the couplet, with the usual prophetic
assurance as though it had already happened. If
we take <hi rend='italic'>the desert</hi> as this is taken in Hosea II. 14,
we may decide for the latter alternative.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Grace have they found in the desert,&nbsp;&nbsp;XXXI. 2</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The people escaped from the sword;</l>
<l>While Israel makes for his rest from afar</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The Lord appears to him<note place='foot'>So
Greek.</note>:&nbsp;&nbsp;3</l>
<l><q rend='pre'>With a love from of old I have loved thee,</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>So in troth I (now) draw thee.<note place='foot'>Or
<hi rend='italic'>continue troth to thee</hi>.</note></l>
<l><q rend='pre'>I will rebuild thee, and built shalt thou be,</q>&nbsp;&nbsp;4</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Maiden of Israel!</l>
<pb n='299'/><anchor id='Pg299'/>
<l><q rend='pre'>Again thou shalt take<note place='foot'>So Greek; Hebrew
<hi rend='italic'>deck thee with</hi>.</note> thee thy timbrels</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And forth to the merrymen's dances.</l>
<l><q rend='pre'>Again shall vineyards be planted<note place='foot'>So
Greek.</note></q>&nbsp;&nbsp;5</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On the hills of Samaria,</l>
<l><q rend='pre'>Planters shall surely plant them(?)</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And forthwith enjoy<note place='foot'>Lit
<hi rend='italic'>make common</hi>, i.e. not be obliged to wait over the first
four crops as required by the law, Lev. xix. 23-25, before having
the fruit released for their own use. Greek reads the similar
Hebrew verb <hi rend='italic'>praise</hi>.</note> (their fruit).</l>
<l><q rend='pre'>For comes the day when watchmen are calling</q>&nbsp;&nbsp;6</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On Ephraim's mountains:</l>
<l><q rend='pre'>Rise, let us go up to Ṣion,</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='post'>To the Lord our God.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
The everyday happiness promised is striking.
Here speaks again the man, who, while
ruin ran over the land, redeemed his ancestral
acres in pledge of the resettlement of all his
people upon their own farms and fields. He is
back in the country, upon the landscapes of his
youth, and in this fresh prospect of the restoration
of Israel he puts first the common joys and
fruitful labours of rural life, and only after these
the national worship centred in Jerusalem. Cornill
denies this last verse to Jeremiah, feeling it
inconsistent with the Prophet's condemnation of
the Temple and the Sacrifices.<note place='foot'>Above, pp.
<ref target="Pg149">149</ref> f., <ref target="Pg152">152</ref>,
<ref target="Pg155">155</ref> ff.</note> But that condemnation
<pb n='300'/><anchor id='Pg300'/>
had been uttered by Jeremiah because
of his contemporaries' sinful use of the House of
God, whereas now he is looking into a new dispensation.
How could he more signally clinch
the promise of that reunion of Israel and Judah,
for which all his life he had longed, than by this
call to them to worship together?
</p>

<p>
The next verses are not so recognisable as
Jeremiah's, unless it be in their last couplet.
The rest rather reflect the Return from Exile as
on the point of coming to pass, which happened
long after Jeremiah's time; and they call the
nation <emph>Jacob</emph>, the name favoured by prophets of
the end of the Exile.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>[Ring out with joy for Jacob,&nbsp;&nbsp;7</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Shout for (?) the head of the nations,<note place='foot'>Duhm
emends to <hi rend='italic'>on the top of the hills</hi>.</note></l>
<l>Publish ye, praise ye and say,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The Lord hath saved His<note place='foot'>So Greek and
Targ.</note> people,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The Remnant of Israel!</l>
<l>Behold from the North I bring them,&nbsp;&nbsp;8</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And gather from ends of the earth;</l>
<l>Their blind and their lame together,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The mother-to-be and her who hath borne.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>In concourse great back they come hither.</l>
<l>With weeping forth did they go,<note place='foot'>So Greek.</note>&nbsp;&nbsp;9</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>With
consolations<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi></note> I bring them,</l>
<pb n='301'/><anchor id='Pg301'/>
<l>I lead them by<note place='foot'>So Greek.</note> streams of water,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On an even way,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>They stumble not on it]<note place='foot'>It is
singular how each of these three verses contains not
four but five lines. Cornill, by using the introduction <hi rend='italic'>Thus
saith the Lord</hi>, omitting <hi rend='italic'>the remnant of Israel</hi>, combining
two pairs of lines and including the following couplet, effects the
arrangement of octastichs to which he has throughout the book
arbitrarily committed himself. Duhm has another metrical
arrangement.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>For a father I am become to Israel,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And my first-born is Ephraim!</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
This couplet may well be Jeremiah's; but
whether it should immediately follow verse 6 is
doubtful. The next lines are hardly his, bearing
the same marks of the late exile as we have seen
in verses 7-9<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>[Hear, O nations, the Word of the Lord,&nbsp;&nbsp;10</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And declare on the far-away isles<note place='foot'>Or
<hi rend='italic'>coasts</hi>.</note>:</l>
<l>Who hath scattered Israel will gather,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And guard as a shepherd his flock.</l>
<l>For the Lord hath ransomed Jacob&nbsp;&nbsp;11</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And redeemed from the hand of the stronger than he.</l>
<l>They are come and ring out on Mount Ṣion,&nbsp;&nbsp;12</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Radiant<note place='foot'>Lit. <hi rend='italic'>they
stream upon</hi>, A.V. <hi rend='italic'>flow together</hi>; but the verb is
to be taken in the same sense as in Ps. xxxiv. 5 <hi rend='italic'>were lightened</hi>
and in Is. lx. 5, R.V. It is the liquid rippling light, thrown
up on the face from water.</note> all with the wealth of the Lord,</l>
<pb n='302'/><anchor id='Pg302'/>
<l>With the corn, the new wine, the fresh oil,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The young of the flock and the herd;</l>
<l>Till their soul becomes as a garden well-watered,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Nor again any more shall they pine.</l>
<l>Then rejoice in the dance shall the maidens,&nbsp;&nbsp;13</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The youths and the old make merry.<note place='foot'>So
Greek.</note></l>
<l>When their mourning I turn to mirth<note place='foot'>Hebrew adds
<hi rend='italic'>and will comfort them</hi>.</note></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And give them joy from their sorrow.</l>
<l>When I richly water the soul of the
priests,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Richly</hi> lit. <hi rend='italic'>with
fat</hi>, which Greek omits but to <hi rend='italic'>priests</hi> adds
<hi rend='italic'>the sons of Levi</hi>, an instance of how ready later hands have
been to add prose glosses to the poetry.</note>&nbsp;&nbsp;14</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And My folk with My bounty are filled&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Rede of the Lord.]</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
The next poems no one denies to Jeremiah;
they are among the finest we have from him.
And how natural that he should conceive and
utter them in those quiet days when he was
at, or near, Ramah, the grave of the mother
of the people.<note place='foot'>1 Sam. x. 2.</note> He hears her century-long
travail of mourning for the loss of the tribes
that were sprung from her Joseph, aggravated
now by the banishment of her Benjamin; but
hears too the promise that her travail shall
be rewarded by their return. The childless old
<pb n='303'/><anchor id='Pg303'/>
man has the soul of mother and father both&mdash;now
weeping with the comfortless Rachel and now,
in human touches unmatched outside the Parable
of the Prodigal, reading into the heart of God the
same instinctive affections, to which, in spite of
himself, every earthly father is stirred by the
mere mention of the name of a rebellious and
wandered son. The most vivid details are these:
<hi rend='italic'>after I had been brought to know</hi>, which might also
be translated <hi rend='italic'>after I had been made to know myself</hi>
and so anticipate <hi rend='italic'>when he came to himself</hi> of our
Lord's Parable; <hi rend='italic'>I smote on my thigh</hi>, the gesture
of despair; and in 20<hi rend='italic'>a</hi> the very human attribution
to the Deity of surprise that the mere name
of Ephraim should move Him to affection, which
recalls both in form and substance the similar
question attributed to the Lord in XII. 9.
</p>

<p>
There is no reason to try, as some do, to correct
in the poems their broken measures, for these
both suit and add to the poignancy and tenderness
which throb through the whole.<note place='foot'>See above pp.
<ref target="Pg046">46</ref> f.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Hark, in Ramah is heard lamentation&nbsp;&nbsp;15</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And bitterest weeping,</l>
<l>Rachel beweeping her children,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And will not be comforted,<note place='foot'>Hebrew and
some versions add <hi rend='italic'>for her children</hi>.</note></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>For they are not.</l>
<l>Thus saith the Lord:&nbsp;&nbsp;16</l>
<pb n='304'/><anchor id='Pg304'/>
<l>Refrain thy voice from weeping,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And from tears thine eyes,</l>
<l>For reward there is for thy travail&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>They are back from the land of the foe!</l>
<l>[And hope there is for thy future,&nbsp;&nbsp;17</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Thy sons come back to their border.]<note place='foot'>Greek
has not the first line of this couplet, and reads
differently the second. The whole seems a needless variant or
paraphrase of 16.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>I have heard, I have heard&nbsp;&nbsp;18</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Ephraim bemoaning,</l>
<l><q rend='pre'>Thou hast chastened me, chastened I am,</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Like a calf untrained.</l>
<l><q rend='pre'>Turn me Thyself, and return I will,</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>For Thou art my God.</l>
<l><q rend='pre'>For after I had turned away (?)<note place='foot'>Or
<hi rend='italic'>turned to</hi> (?). Greek reads <hi rend='italic'>after my
captivity</hi>.</note></q>&nbsp;&nbsp;19</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>I repented ... (?)</l>
<l><q rend='pre'>And after I was brought to know,</q><note place='foot'>Some would
read <hi rend='italic'>was chastised</hi>.</note></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>I smote on my thigh.</l>
<l><q rend='pre'>I am shaméd, yea and confounded,</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='post'>As I bear the reproach of my
youth.</q><note place='foot'>Still have that on my conscience; there is no need to doubt
this line in whole or part as some do.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Is Ephraim My dearest son,<note place='foot'>After all that has
passed!</note>&nbsp;&nbsp;20</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>A child of delights?</l>
<pb n='305'/><anchor id='Pg305'/>
<l>That as oft as against him I speak</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>I must think of him still.</l>
<l>My bowels for him are yearning,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Pity him I must!&mdash;Rede of the Lord.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Set thee up way-marks,&nbsp;&nbsp;21</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Plant thyself guide-posts!</l>
<l>Put to the highway thy heart,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The way that thou wentest.</l>
<l>Come back, O maiden of Israel,&nbsp;&nbsp;22</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Back to thy towns here.</l>
<l>How long to drift hither and thither,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Thou turn-about daughter!</l>
<l>[For the Lord hath created a new thing on earth,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>A female shall compass a
man.]<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Compass</hi> or <hi rend='italic'>change
to</hi> (?) This couplet has been the despair of commentators. Its exilic terms,
<hi rend='italic'>created</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>female</hi>, relieve us
of it.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
The next small poem, when we take from it
certain marks of a later date is possibly Jeremiah's,
though this is not certain; to the previous Oracles
on Ephraim it naturally adds one upon Judah.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Thus saith the Lord:<note place='foot'>Hebrew adds
<hi rend='italic'>of hosts, God of Israel</hi>.</note>&nbsp;&nbsp;23</l>
<l>Once more shall they speak this word.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>In Judah's land and her towns,</l>
<l>When I turn again their captivity:</l>
<pb n='306'/><anchor id='Pg306'/>
<l><q>The Lord thee bless, homestead of justice!</q><note place='foot'>Hebrew
and Greek add <hi rend='italic'>holy mount</hi>, a late term and here
irrelevant, for it is <emph>all</emph> Judah that is described.</note></l>
<l>In Judah and all her towns shall be dwelling&nbsp;&nbsp;24</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Tillers and they that roam with flocks,</l>
<l>For I have refreshed the<note place='foot'>Greek
<hi rend='italic'>each</hi>.</note> weary soul,&nbsp;&nbsp;25</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And cheered every soul that was pining.</l>
<l>[On this I awoke and beheld,&nbsp;&nbsp;26</l>
<l>And sweet unto me was my sleep.]<note place='foot'>Doubtful.
Jeremiah had nothing to do with dreams as
means of prophecy.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Behold, are coming the days&mdash;&nbsp;&nbsp;27</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Rede of the Lord&mdash;</l>
<l>When Israel and Judah<note place='foot'>Hebrew adds
to each <hi rend='italic'>the house of</hi>.</note> I sow</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>With the seed of man and of beast;</l>
<l>And it shall be, as I was wakeful upon them&nbsp;&nbsp;28</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>To tear down and do evil,<note place='foot'>Hebrew adds from
i. 10 (<hi rend='italic'>q.v.</hi>), <hi rend='italic'>pluck up, break down and
destroy</hi>.</note></l>
<l>So wakeful on them will I be,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>To build and to plant&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Rede of the Lord.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
These prophecies of the physical restoration of
Israel and Judah are fitly followed by two, in what
is rather rhythmical prose than verse, which define
the moral and spiritual aspects of the new
dispensation; both laying stress on individual
<pb n='307'/><anchor id='Pg307'/>
responsibility, the one in ethics, 29, 30, the other
in religion, 31 ff., the proclamation of The New
Covenant. They are no doubt Jeremiah's: we
shall take them up in the last lecture.
</p>

<p>
The time of relief and fair promise, out of which
we have supposed that the Prophet conceived and
uttered the preceding Oracles, came to a sudden
and tragic close with the assassination of the good
governor Gedaliah by the fanatic Ishmael. Had
this not happened we can see from those Oracles
on what favourable lines the restoration of Judah
might have proceeded under the co-operation of
Gedaliah and Jeremiah, and how after so long and
heart-breaking a mission of doom to his people
the Prophet might at last have achieved before
his eyes some positive part in their social and
political reconstruction; for certainly he had
already proved his practical ability as well his
power of far vision. But even such sunset success
was denied him, and once more his people
crumbled under his hand. God provided some
better thing for him in the spiritual future of
Israel, to which he must now pass through still
deeper sacrifice and humiliation.<note place='foot'>As Dr.
Skinner says, <q>it was only by way of the eternal world
that Jeremiah could enter on the fruition of his hopes.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
Ishmael, against whom the noble Gedaliah would
take no warning, was one of those fanatics with
whom the Jewish nation have been cursed at all
<pb n='308'/><anchor id='Pg308'/>
crises in their history.<note place='foot'><q>That
atrocious brigand</q> (Renan).</note> The motive for his crime
was the same as had inspired the fatal defence of
Jerusalem, a blind passion against the Chaldean
rule. Having slain Gedaliah he attempted to
remove the little remnant at Miṣpah to the other
side of Jordan but was overtaken by a force under
Gedaliah's lieutenant, Johanan-ben-Kareah, and
his captives were recovered. Fearing the wrath
of the Chaldeans for the murder of their deputy,
the little flock did not return to Miṣpah but moved
south to Gidroth<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The
folds of</hi>, as Aquila shows that we should read Hebrew
<hi rend='italic'>Geruth</hi>.</note>-Chimham near Bethlehem,
broken, trembling, and uncertain whether to
remain in their land or to flee from it.<note place='foot'>For
the above see ch. xli, continuing from xl what is no
doubt Baruch's account.</note>
</p>

<p>
The Prophet was the one hope left to them, and
like Ṣedekiah they turned to him in their perplexity
for a word of guidance from the Lord.
With his usual deliberation he took ten days to
answer, laying the matter before the Lord in
prayer; studying, we may be sure, the actual facts
of the situation (including what he already knew
to be the people's hope of finding security in Egypt)
and carefully sifting out his own thoughts and
impulses from the convictions which his prayers
brought him from God. The result was clear:
the people must abide in their land and not fear
<pb n='309'/><anchor id='Pg309'/>
the Chaldeans, who under God's hand would let
them be; but if they set their faces for Egypt, the
sword which they feared would overtake them.
This was God's Word; if they broke their promise
to obey it, they would surely die.<note place='foot'>So ch.
xlii. This and xli are substantially the same in
Hebrew and Greek, the Greek as usual omitting the repetitions
of the Divine Titles and of the names of the fathers of the actors,
and a few other expansions; and suggesting, as Syriac and
Vulg. also do, some minor corrections.</note>
</p>

<p>
With shame we read the rest of the story.
Jeremiah had well discerned<note place='foot'>xxiv. 1
ff.</note> that those of his
countrymen, who had been deported in 597, were
the good figs of his vision and those who remained
the bad. The latter were of the breed that had
turned Temple and Sacrifice into fetishes, for as
such they now treated the Prophet, the greatest
whom God ever sent to Israel. Covetous of having
him with them they eagerly asked him for a Word
of the Lord, promising to obey it, in the expectation
of their kind that it would be according to
their own ignorant wishes; but when it declared
against these, they scolded Jeremiah as disappointed
barbarians do their idols, and presuming
on his age as a weakness, complained that he had
been set against them by Baruch, a philo-Chaldean
who would have them all carried off to Babylon!
So Baruch also&mdash;all praise to him&mdash;held the same
sane views of the situation as his Prophet and as
<pb n='310'/><anchor id='Pg310'/>
that wise governor Gedaliah. In spite of their
promise they refused to obey the Word of the Lord,
fled for Egypt carrying with them Jeremiah and
Baruch, and reached the frontier town of Tahpanhes.
How it must have broken the Prophet's
heart!<note place='foot'>xliii. 1-7. Hebrew and Greek still agree in essentials, Greek
as usual omitting Divine Titles (which the Hebrew copyists delight
in repeating), the needless father-names and also the term <hi rend='italic'>proud</hi>
(or <hi rend='italic'>presumptuous</hi>) in 2, where it reads <hi rend='italic'>the
others</hi> for the senseless Hebrew participle <hi rend='italic'>saying</hi>. In 6
it reads <hi rend='italic'>remainder</hi> for <hi rend='italic'>children</hi>, and
<hi rend='italic'>household</hi> for <hi rend='italic'>daughters&mdash;of the
king</hi>.</note>
</p>

<p>
But not his honesty or his courage! At
Tahpanhes he set before the fugitives one of those
symbols which had been characteristic of his
prophesying. He laid great stones in the entry
of the house of the Pharaoh and declared that
Nebuchadrezzar would plant his throne and spread
his tapestries upon them, when he came to smite
Egypt, assuming that land as easily as a shepherd
dons his garment; and after breaking the obelisks
of its gods and burning their temples he would
safely depart from it.<note place='foot'>xliii. 8-13.
In 9 for the obscure Hebrew phrase, R.V. <hi rend='italic'>in
mortar in the brickwork</hi>, Greek reads ὲν προθύροις; in 10 lacks
<hi rend='italic'>My servant</hi>, for <hi rend='italic'>I</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>I
have</hi> reads <hi rend='italic'>he</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>thou hast</hi>; and in 12
<hi rend='italic'>he shall</hi> for <hi rend='italic'>I will</hi>. Also in 12 for
<hi rend='italic'>he shall array himself with
the land of Egypt as a shepherd putteth on his garment</hi>, Greek
has <hi rend='italic'>he shall clear out the land as a shepherd clears his garment
from lice</hi>. Suitable and vivid as this figure is and adopted by
many moderns, one hesitates to use it for lack of confirmation
from other sources. The other one is sufficient.</note>
</p>

<pb n='311'/><anchor id='Pg311'/>

<p>
So far the narrative runs clearly, but in Ch.
XLIV, the last that is written of Jeremiah, the
expander has been specially busy.<note place='foot'>Besides its usual
<hi rend='italic'>minus</hi> Greek omits in 1 <hi rend='italic'>and at Noph</hi>, in 3
<hi rend='italic'>and to serve</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>neither ... fathers</hi>, in
9 <hi rend='italic'>and your own wickedness</hi>, in 10 <hi rend='italic'>neither have
they feared, in my law nor, before you and</hi>, in 11 <hi rend='italic'>against
you ... all Judah</hi>, at least half of 12, in 15 <hi rend='italic'>unto other
gods</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>that stood by</hi>, in 18 <hi rend='italic'>and to
pour out ... unto her</hi>, in 19 <hi rend='italic'>to portray her</hi>, in 22,
<hi rend='italic'>without inhabitant</hi>, in 23 <hi rend='italic'>as it is this
day</hi>, in 28 <hi rend='italic'>mine or theirs</hi>. Also Greek begins 19,
<hi rend='italic'>And all the women answered and said</hi>, and in 25 for
<hi rend='italic'>ye and your wives</hi> reads properly <hi rend='italic'>ye
women</hi>.</note> The chapter
opens, verses 1-14, with what purports to be an
Oracle by Jeremiah concerning, not the little band
which had brought him down with them, but <hi rend='italic'>all the
Jews which were dwelling in the land of Egypt, at
Migdol and Tahpanhes</hi>,<note place='foot'>Hebrew adds
<hi rend='italic'>and at Noph</hi> (Memphis).</note> on the northern frontier,
<hi rend='italic'>and in the land of Pathros</hi>, or Upper Egypt. It is
not said that these came to Tahpanhes to receive
the Oracle. Yet the arrival of a company fresh
from Judah and her recent awful experiences must
have stirred the Jewish communities already in
Egypt and drawn at least representatives of them
to Tahpanhes to see and to hear the newcomers.
If so, it would be natural for Jeremiah to expound
the happenings in Judah, and the Divine reasons
for them. No date is given for the Prophet's Oracle.
This need not have been uttered for some time
after he reached Egypt, when he was able to acquaint
himself with the conditions and character
<pb n='312'/><anchor id='Pg312'/>
of his countrymen in their pagan environment,
and learn in particular how they had fallen away
like their fathers to the worship of other gods.
Such indeed is the double theme of the words attributed
to him. He is made to say that Jerusalem
and Judah are now desolate because of their
people's wickedness, and especially their idolatry,
in stubborn disobedience to the repeated Word of
their God by His prophets; surely a similar punishment
must befall the Jews in Egypt, for they also
have given themselves to idols. But so awkwardly
and diffusely is the Oracle reported to us that we
cannot doubt that, whatever its original form was,
this has been considerably expanded. At least
we may be sure that Jeremiah uttered some Oracle
against the idolatry of the Jews in Egypt, for in
what follows they give their answer.
</p>

<p>
From verse 15 the story and the words it
reports become&mdash;with the help of the briefer
Greek version and the elision of manifest additions
in both the Hebrew and the Greek texts<note place='foot'>Duhm, Rothstein,
Cornill, Gillies, etc., eliminate from 15 as
a later addition <hi rend='italic'>all the men who knew that their wives burned
to other gods</hi> on the ground that 19 shows the women alone to
be the speakers; Duhm, precariously changing besides <hi rend='italic'>a great
assembly</hi> (by the alteration of one letter) to <hi rend='italic'>with a great</hi>
(loud) <hi rend='italic'>voice</hi>. And these critics and Driver, Giesebrecht and Peake
rightly take <hi rend='italic'>even all the people ... in Pathros</hi> as a late gloss
founded on verse 1.</note>&mdash;more
definite. Either <emph>both</emph> the men whom Jeremiah
<pb n='313'/><anchor id='Pg313'/>
addressed <emph>and</emph> their women, or, as is textually
more probable, the women alone answered
him in the following remarkable terms. These
run in rhythmical prose, that almost throughout
falls into metrical lines, which the English reader
may easily discriminate for himself.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
XLIV. 16. The word which thou hast spoken to
us in the Name of the Lord!&mdash;we will not
hearken to thee!
17. But we shall surely perform every word,
which has gone forth from our mouth:<note place='foot'>That is
<hi rend='italic'>solemnly sworn</hi>; Judg. xi. 36; Numb. xxx. 2, 12.</note> to
burn to the Queen of Heaven and pour her
libations, as we and our fathers did, our
kings and our princes, in the cities of Judah
and streets of Jerusalem, and had fulness of
bread, and were well and saw no evil.
18. But since we left off to burn to the Queen
of Heaven, and to pour her libations, we have
lacked everything and been by the sword
and the famine consumed.
19. And<note place='foot'>Some Greek MSS. and Syriac have <hi rend='italic'>and all
the women answered</hi>, an addition felt to be necessary after the mention of
<hi rend='italic'>both</hi> men and women in 15.</note>
while we were burning to the Queen
of Heaven and poured her libations, did we
make her cakes<note place='foot'>Hebrew adds <hi rend='italic'>to portray
her</hi>, that is on the cakes.</note> and pour her libations without
our husbands?
</quote>

<p>
This was a straight challenge to the prophet,
<pb n='314'/><anchor id='Pg314'/>
returning to him the form of his own argument.
As he had traced the calamities of Judah to her
disobedience of Yahweh, they traced those which
hit themselves hardest as women to their having
ceased to worship Ashtoreth. What could Jeremiah
answer to logic formally so identical with
his own? The first of the answers attributed to
him, verses 20-23, asserts that among their other
sins it was their worship of the Queen of Heaven,
and not, as they said, their desisting from it,
which had worked their doom. But this answer
is too full of deuteronomic phrasing for the
whole of it to be the Prophet's; if any of it is
genuine this can only be part of the obviously
expanded opening, 21, 22<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>.
</p>

<p>
The real, the characteristic answers of Jeremiah
are the others: to the women reported in
verses 24, 25, and to all the Jews in Egypt 26-28;
in which respectively he treats the claim of the
women ironically, and leaves the issue between
his word and that of his opponents to be decided
by the event. These answers also have been expanded,
but we may reasonably take the following
to be original.<note place='foot'>Erbt first made
clear the metrical form of these verses,
though I think too grudgingly, and has ignored the fact that
they are not one but two Oracles.</note> Note how they connect in verse
24 with verse 19. I again follow the Greek.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
XLIV. 24. And Jeremiah said [to the people
<pb n='315'/><anchor id='Pg315'/>
and] to the women, [25] Hear the Word of the
Lord, Thus saith the Lord, Israel's God:
</p>
<lg>
<l>Ye women<note place='foot'>So Greek.</note> have said with your mouths</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And fulfilled with your hands,</l>
<l><q rend='pre'>We must indeed perform our vows,</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Which we have vowed,</l>
<l><q rend='pre'>To burn to the Queen of Heaven,</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='post'>And to pour her libations!</q></l>
<l>Indeed then establish your words<note place='foot'>Generally accepted
instead of Hebrew <hi rend='italic'>vows</hi>.</note></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And perform your vows!</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Jeremiah <q>adds this by way of irony.</q><note place='foot'>Calvin.</note> Having
thus finished with the women, he adds an Oracle
to the Jews in general.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
26. Therefore hear the Word of the Lord all
Judah, who are settled in the land of Egypt:
</p>
<lg>
<l>By My great Name I swear,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Sayeth the Lord,</l>
<l>That My Name shall no more be called</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>By the mouth of a man of Judah&mdash;</l>
<l>Saying, <q>As liveth the Lord!</q>&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>In all the land of Egypt.</l>
<l>Lo, I am wakeful upon you&nbsp;&nbsp;27</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>For evil and not for good.<note place='foot'>The
rest of 27 and 28<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>, the destruction of all the Jews in
Egypt, is a prose expansion.</note></l>
<pb n='316'/><anchor id='Pg316'/>
<l>And the remnant of Judah shall know,&nbsp;&nbsp;28<hi rend='italic'>b</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Whose is the word that shall stand.<note place='foot'>Hebrew
adds, but Greek lacks, <hi rend='italic'>from me or from them</hi>.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
These are the last words we have from him,
and up to these last he is still himself&mdash;broken-hearted
indeed and disappointed in the ultimate
remnant of his people&mdash;but still himself in his
honesty, his steadfastness to the truth and his
courage; still himself in his irony, his deliberateness
and his confident appeal to the future for
the vindication of his word.
</p>

<p>
So he disappears from our sight. How pathetic
that even after his death he is not spared from
spoiling but that the last clear streams of his
prophesying must run out, as we have seen, in
the sands of those expanders!
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='317'/><anchor id='Pg317'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<anchor id="Lecture_VII"/>
<index index="toc" level1="Lecture VII. The Story Of His Soul."/>
<index index="pdf" level1="Lecture VII."/>
<head type='sub'>Lecture VII.</head>
<head>The Story Of His Soul.</head>

<p>
In this Lecture I propose to gather up the story
of the soul of the man, whose service, and the
fortunes it met with, we have followed over the
more than forty years of their range. The
interest of many great lives lies in their natural
and fair development: the growth of gift towards
occasion, the beckoning of occasion when gift is
ripe, the sympathy between a man and his times,
the coincidence of public need with personal
powers or ambition&mdash;the zest of the race and the
thrill of the goal. With Jeremiah it was altogether
otherwise.
</p>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<head>1. Protest and Agony.
(I, IV. 10, 19, VI. 11, XI. 18-XII. 6, XV. 10-XVI. 9,
XVII. 14-18, XVIII. 18-23, XX. 7-18.)</head>

<p>
If, as is possible, the name Jeremiah means <hi rend='italic'>Yahweh hurls</hi>
or <hi rend='italic'>shoots forth</hi>, it fitly describes the
Prophet's temper, struggles and fate. For he was
a projectile, fired upon a hostile world with a
force not his own, and on a mission from which,
from the first, his gifts and affections recoiled and
against which he continued to protest. On his
<pb n='318'/><anchor id='Pg318'/>
passage through the turbulence of his time he
reminds us of one of those fatal shells which rend
the air as they shoot, distinct even through the
roar of battle by their swift, shrill anguish and
effecting their end by their explosion.
</p>

<p>
Jeremiah has been called The Weeping Prophet,
but that is mainly because of the attribution
to him of The Book of Lamentations, which does
not profess to be his and is certainly later than
his day. Not weeping, though he had to weep,
so much as groaning or even screaming is the
particular pitch of the tone of this Prophet. As
he says himself,
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>For as oft as I speak I must shriek,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And cry <q>Violence and Spoil!</q><note place='foot'>xx.
8.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
His first word is one of shrinking, <hi rend='italic'>I cannot speak,
I am too young</hi>.<note place='foot'>i. 6.</note> The voice of pain and protest is
in most of his Oracles. He curses the day of his
birth and cries woe to his mother that she bare
him. He makes us feel that he has been charged
against his will and he hurtles on his career like
one slung at a target who knows that in fulfilling
his commission he shall be broken&mdash;as indeed he
was.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Lord, Thou beguiled'st me, and beguiled I let myself be,</l>
<l>Thou wast too strong for me, Thou hast prevailed.<note place='foot'>xx.
7.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<pb n='319'/><anchor id='Pg319'/>

<p>
Power was pain to him; he carried God's
Word as <hi rend='italic'>a burning fire in his heart</hi>.<note place='foot'>vi.
11, xx. 9.</note> If the strength
and the joy in which others rise on their gifts
ever came to him they quickly fled. Isaiah, the
only other prophet comparable, accepts his
mission and springs to it with freedom. But Jeremiah,
always coerced, shrinks, protests, craves
leave to retire. So that while Isaiah's answer to
the call of God is <hi rend='italic'>Here am I, send me</hi>, Jeremiah's
might have been <q>I would be anywhere else than
here, let me go.</q> He spent much of himself in
complaint and in debate both with God and with
his fellow-men:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Mother! Ah me!</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>As whom hast thou borne me?</l>
<l>A man of quarrel and of strife</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>To the whole of the land&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>All of them curse me.<note place='foot'>xv. 10; cp. xii.
1.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Nor did he live to see any solid results from
his work. His call was
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>To root up, pull down and destroy,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>To build and to plant.<note place='foot'>i. 10, p.
<ref target="Pg083">83</ref>.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
If this represents the Prophet's earliest impression
of his charge, the proportion between
the destructive and constructive parts of it is
ominous; if it sums up his experience it is less
than the truth. Though he sowed the most
<pb n='320'/><anchor id='Pg320'/>
fruitful seeds in the fields of Israel's religion,
none sprang in his lifetime. For his own generation
he built nothing. Sympathetic with the
aims and the start of the greatest reform in
Israel's history, he grew sceptical of its progress
and had to denounce the dogmas into which the
spirit of it hardened. A king sought his counsel
and refused to follow it; the professional prophets
challenged him to speak in the Name of the Lord
and then denied His Word; the priests were ever
against him, and the overseer of the Temple put
him in the stocks. Though the people came to his
side at one crisis, they rejected him at others and
fell back on their formalist teachers, and the
prophets of a careless optimism. Though he
loved his people with passion, and pled with them
all his life, he failed to convince or move them to
repentance&mdash;and more than once was forbidden
even to pray for them. He was charged not to
marry nor found a family nor share in either the
griefs or the joys of society. His brethren and his
father's house betrayed him, and he was stoned
out of Anathoth by his fellow-villagers. Though
he could count on a friend or two at court, he
had to flee into hiding. King Ṣedekiah, who felt
a slavish reverence for his word, was unable to
save him from imprisonment in a miry pit, and
he owed his deliverance, neither to friend nor
countryman, but to a negro eunuch of the palace.
Even after the fall of Jerusalem, when his prophecies
<pb n='321'/><anchor id='Pg321'/>
were vindicated almost to the letter, he
failed to keep a remnant of the nation in Judah;
and his word had no influence with the little
band which clung to him as a fetish and hurried
him to Egypt. There, with his back to the brief
ministry of hope that had been allowed him, he
must take up again the task of denunciation
which he abhorred; and this is the last we hear
of him.
</p>

<p>
It was the same with individuals as with the
people as a whole. We may say that with few
exceptions, whomever he touched he singed,
whomever he struck he broke&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>a man of quarrel
and strife to the whole land, all of them curse me</hi>. And
he cursed them back. When Pashhur put him in
the stocks Jeremiah called him <hi rend='italic'>Magor Missabib</hi>,
Terror-all-round, <hi rend='italic'>for lo, I will make thee a terror to
thyself and to all thy friends, they shall fall by the sword
and thou behold it</hi>.<note place='foot'>xx. 2 ff.; see p.
<ref target="Pg192">192</ref>.</note> Nothing satisfied his contempt
for Jehoiakim, but that dying the king
should be buried with the burial of an ass.<note place='foot'>xxii. 18 f.; see
p. <ref target="Pg167">167</ref>.</note> Even
for Ṣedekiah, to whom he showed some tenderness,
his last utterance was of a vision of the weak
monarch being mocked by his own women.<note place='foot'>xxxviii. 19 ff.; pp.
<ref target="Pg282">282</ref> f.</note>
His irony, keen to the end, proves his detachment
from all around him. His scorn for the bulk of
the other prophets is scorching, and his words
<pb n='322'/><anchor id='Pg322'/>
for some of them fatal. Of Shemaiah, who wrote
of the captives in Babylon letters of a tenor
opposite to his own, he said <hi rend='italic'>he shall not have a man
to dwell among this people</hi>.<note place='foot'>xxix.
24-32.</note> When the prophet
Hananiah contradicted him, he foretold, after
carefully deliberating between his rival's words
and his own, that Hananiah would die, and
Hananiah was dead within a few months.<note place='foot'>xxviii. 17.</note> He
had no promise for those whom he counselled to
desert to the enemy save of bare life; nor anything
better even for the best of his friends:
<hi rend='italic'>Seekest thou great things for thyself? Seek them not!
Only thy life will I give thee for a prey in all places
whither thou goest.</hi><note place='foot'>xlv. 5; p.
<ref target="Pg228">228</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
The following are the full texts from which the
foregoing summary has been drawn and most of
which I have reserved for this Lecture.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
IV. 10. Then said I, Ah Lord Yahweh, Verily
Thou hast deceived this people and Jerusalem,
saying There shall be peace!&mdash;whereas
the sword striketh to the life!
</p>
<lg>
<l>O my bowels! My bowels, I writhe!&nbsp;&nbsp;19</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>O the walls of my heart!</l>
<l>My heart is in storm upon me,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>I cannot keep silence!</l>
</lg>
<lg>
<l>I am filled with the rage of the Lord,&nbsp;&nbsp;VI. 11</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Worn with holding it in!</l>
<l>Pour it out on the child in the street,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Where the youths draw together.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<pb n='323'/><anchor id='Pg323'/>

<p>
The following refers to the conspiracy of his
fellow-villagers against him.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>The Lord let me know and I knew it,&nbsp;&nbsp;XI. 18</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Then I saw through<note place='foot'>So Greek;
Hebrew <hi rend='italic'>thou lettest me see</hi>.</note> their doings;</l>
<l>But I like a tame lamb had been,&nbsp;&nbsp;19</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Unwittingly<note place='foot'>Greek; Hebrew
takes this with the next line.</note> led to the slaughter.</l>
<l>On me they had framed their devices</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='pre'>Let's destroy the tree in its
sap.</q><note place='foot'>So generally read since Hitzig; Hebrew has
<hi rend='italic'>bread</hi>, i.e. <hi rend='italic'>fruit</hi>.</note></l>
<l>Cut him off from the land of the living,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='post'>That his name be remembered no more.</q></l>
<l>O Lord, Thou Who righteously judgest,&nbsp;&nbsp;20</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Who triest the reins and the heart,</l>
<l>Let me see Thy vengeance upon them,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>For to Thee I have opened<note place='foot'>Others:
<hi rend='italic'>on Thee I have rolled</hi>; cp. xx. 12.</note> my cause.</l>
</lg>
<p>
21. Therefore thus saith the Lord of the men of
Anathoth, who are seeking my<note place='foot'>Greek; Hebrew
<hi rend='italic'>thy</hi>.</note> life, saying,
Thou shalt not prophesy in the Name of the
Lord, that thou die not by our hands:<note place='foot'>Hebrew copyists
senselessly repeat, <hi rend='italic'>Thus saith the Lord
of Hosts</hi>; Greek omits.</note>
</p>
<lg>
<l>Lo, I am to visit upon them!&nbsp;&nbsp;22</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their<note place='foot'>So Greek.</note>
youths shall die by the sword,</l>
<pb n='324'/><anchor id='Pg324'/>
<l>Their sons and their daughters by famine,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Till no remnant be left them.&nbsp;&nbsp;23</l>
<l>For evil I bring on the men of Anathoth,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The year of their visitation.</l>
</lg>
<lg>
<l>Mother! Ah me!&nbsp;&nbsp;XV. 10</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>As whom<note place='foot'>Greek.</note> hast thou borne me?</l>
<l>A man of strife and of quarrel</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>To the whole of the land.</l>
<l>I have not lent upon usury, nor any to me,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Yet all of them curse me.</l>
<l>Amen,<note place='foot'>Greek, meaning, Thy sanction to their
curses.</note> O Lord! If I be to blame(?),&nbsp;&nbsp;11</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>If I never besought Thee,</l>
<l>In the time of their trouble and straits,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>For the good of my foes.</l>
<l>Is the arm on my shoulder iron&nbsp;&nbsp;12</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Or brass my brow?<note place='foot'>The text
of the last six lines is corrupt; the above is
Duhm's reading after the Greek. See too J. R. Gillies. Verses
13, 14 are out of place here, see xvii. 3, 4.</note></l>
<l>Thou hast known it,<note place='foot'>Greek omits.</note> O Lord.&nbsp;&nbsp;15</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Think on and visit me!</l>
<l>Avenge me on them that pursue me,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Halt not Thy wrath.</l>
<l>Know that for Thee I have borne reproach</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>From them who despise<note place='foot'>So Greek;
Hebrew (with same consonants, but the first
two transposed) <hi rend='italic'>Found were Thy words</hi>.</note>
Thy words.&nbsp;&nbsp;16</l>
<pb n='325'/><anchor id='Pg325'/>
<l>[End them!<note place='foot'>So Greek; Hebrew <hi rend='italic'>I did eat
them</hi>. But all this bracketed quatrain breaks the connection between what precedes
and verse 17.</note> Thy word's my delight</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And the joy of my heart</l>
<l>For Thy Name has been calléd upon me,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Lord of Hosts!]</l>
<l>I have not sat in their company&nbsp;&nbsp;17</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Jesting and merry.<note place='foot'>Cornill after
Greek.</note></l>
<l>Because of Thy hand alone I sit,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>For with rage Thou hast filled me.</l>
<l>Why is my pain perpetual,&nbsp;&nbsp;18</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>My wound past healing?</l>
<l>Art Thou to be a false stream to me,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>As waters that fail?</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
This to Him on Whom he had called as The
Fountain of Living Water!
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Therefore thus saith the Lord:&nbsp;&nbsp;19</l>
<l>If thou wilt turn, then shall I turn thee,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>That before Me thou stand;</l>
<l>And if thou bring forth the dear from the vile,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>As My Mouth thou shalt be.</l>
<l>[Then may those turn to thee,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>But not thou to them.]</l>
<l>For to this people I set thee&nbsp;&nbsp;20</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>An impassable wall.<note place='foot'>Omit
<hi rend='italic'>of bronze</hi> for the metre's sake; it is a copyist's echo
of i. 18. Cornill omits <hi rend='italic'>impassable</hi> instead.</note></l>
<pb n='326'/><anchor id='Pg326'/>
<l>When they fight thee they shall not prevail,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>With thee am I to deliver,<note place='foot'>Hebrew adds
<hi rend='italic'>Rede of the Lord</hi>.</note></l>
<l>And deliver thee I shall from the power of the wicked,&nbsp;&nbsp;21</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>From the hand of the cruel redeem thee.</l>
</lg>
<lg>
<l>Thou<note place='foot'>Hebrew precedes this with And the Word of
<hi rend='italic'>the Lord came unto me</hi>, which Greek is without, thus closely
connecting xvi. 2 ff. with xv. 21.</note> shalt not take a wife&mdash;&nbsp;&nbsp;XVI.
2</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Rede of the Lord&mdash;</l>
<l>Nor shall sons nor daughters be thine</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Within this place.</l>
<l>For thus hath the Lord said:&nbsp;&nbsp;3</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>As for the sons and the daughters</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Born in this place,</l>
<l>[As for their mothers who bore them</l>
<l>And their fathers who gat them</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Throughout this land.]</l>
<l>Painfullest deaths shall they die&nbsp;&nbsp;4</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Unmourned, unburied,</l>
<l>[Be for dung on the face of the ground,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Consumed by famine and sword.]</l>
<l>And their corpses shall be for food</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>To the birds of the heaven and beasts of the
earth.<note place='foot'>In 3, 4 the bracketed lines are probably expansions of the
original.</note></l>
<pb n='327'/><anchor id='Pg327'/>
<l>Thus saith the Lord:&nbsp;&nbsp;5</l>
<l>Come not to the house of mourning,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Nor go about to lament,<note place='foot'>Hebrew, etc., add
<hi rend='italic'>nor bemoan them</hi>&mdash;expansion.</note></l>
<l>Because My Peace I have swept</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Away from this
people.<note place='foot'>5<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>,
6<hi rend='italic'>a</hi> are not in Greek.</note></l>
<l>For them shall none lament,&nbsp;&nbsp;6<hi rend='italic'>b</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Nor gash nor make themselves bald;</l>
<l>Neither break bread<note place='foot'>So Greek.</note> to the
mourner,<note place='foot'>By a change of vowels.</note>&nbsp;&nbsp;7</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>For the dead to console him,</l>
<l>Nor pour him<note place='foot'>So Greek.</note> the cup of condolement</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>For his father or mother.</l>
<l>Come thou not to the house of feasting,&nbsp;&nbsp;8</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>To sit with them eating and drinking.</l>
<l>For thus saith the Lord of Hosts,<note place='foot'>Greek lacks
<hi rend='italic'>of Hosts</hi>.</note>&nbsp;&nbsp;9</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The God of Israel:</l>
<l>Lo, I shall stay from this place,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>In your days, to your eyes,</l>
<l>The voices of joy and of gladness,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The voices of bridegroom and bride.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Follows, in 10-13, the moral reason of all this&mdash;the
people's leaving of their God&mdash;and the doom
of exile.
</p>

<pb n='328'/><anchor id='Pg328'/>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Heal me O Lord, and I shall be healed,&nbsp;&nbsp;XVII. 14</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Save me and saved shall I be.<note place='foot'>Perhaps 14
connects with 9, 10. The line <hi rend='italic'>For Thou art
my praise</hi> is a late addition.</note></l>
<l>Lo, there be those, who keep saying to me.&nbsp;&nbsp;15</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='pre'>Where is the Word of the Lord?</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='post'>Pray let it come!</q></l>
<l>But I have not pressed ... (?)&nbsp;&nbsp;16</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Nor for evil<note place='foot'>So Aq. Symm. Syr.,
reading <hi rend='italic'>ra'ah, evil</hi> for <hi rend='italic'>ro'eh,
shepherd</hi>.</note> kept at Thee,</l>
<l>Nor longed for the woeful day,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Thyself dost know.</l>
<l>Whatever came forth from my lips</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>To Thy face it was.</l>
<l>Be not a (cause of) dismay to me,&nbsp;&nbsp;17</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>My Refuge in evil days.</l>
<l>Shamed be my hunters, but shamed not I,&nbsp;&nbsp;18</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Dismayed, but dismayed not I.</l>
<l>Bring Thou upon them the day of disaster</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And break them twice over!</l>
</lg>
<p>
XVIII. 18. And they said, Come and let us devise
against Jeremiah devices, for the Law<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Torah</hi>,
see p. <ref target="Pg154">154</ref>.</note> shall
not perish from the priest, nor Counsel from
the wise, nor the Word from the prophet.
Come let us smite him with the tongue and
pay no heed to any of his words.
</p>
<lg>
<l>O Lord, unto me give Thou heed,&nbsp;&nbsp;19</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And hark to the voice of my plea!<note place='foot'>So Greek;
Hebrew <hi rend='italic'>of mine accusers</hi>.</note></l>
<pb n='329'/><anchor id='Pg329'/>
<l>Shall evil be rendered for good,&nbsp;&nbsp;20</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>That they dig a pit for my life?<note place='foot'>To this
line Greek adds <hi rend='italic'>have privily laid a stumbling block</hi>.
Most regard both lines as an expansion from 22.</note></l>
<l>O remember my standing before Thee,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>To bespeak their good&mdash;</l>
<l>To turn Thy fury from off them.</l>
<l>Give therefore their sons to famine,&nbsp;&nbsp;21</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And spill them out to the sword.</l>
<l>Let their wives be widows and childless</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And their men be slain of death&mdash;</l>
<l>And smitten their youths by the sword in battle.</l>
<l>May crying be heard from their homes,&nbsp;&nbsp;22</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>As a troop comes sudden upon them!</l>
<l>For a pit have they dug to catch me,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And hidden snares for my feet.</l>
<l>But Thou, O Lord, hast known&nbsp;&nbsp;23</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their counsels for death against me.</l>
<l>Pardon Thou not their iniquities,<note place='foot'>Pl.; So Greek.</note></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Nor blot from Thy Presence their sins;<note place='foot'>Pl.;
So Greek.</note></l>
<l>But let them be tumbled before Thee</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Deal with them in time of Thy wrath.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Verses 21-23 are rejected by Duhm and Cornill,
along with XI. 22<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>, 23, XII.
3<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>, XVII. 18 for no
textual or metrical reasons, but only because
these scholars shrink from attributing to Jeremiah
such outbursts of passion: just as we have
<pb n='330'/><anchor id='Pg330'/>
seen them for similarly sheer reasons of sentiment
refuse to consider as his the advice to desert to
the enemy.<note place='foot'>Above, pp.
<ref target="Pg276">276</ref> ff.</note> Yet they admit inconsistently the
genuineness of VI. 11, XI. 20, XV. 15.<note place='foot'>In contrast with its
boldness in textual criticism a curious
timidity of sentiment has set through recent O.T. scholarship in
Germany from which the older German scholars were free.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Lord, Thou beguiledst me, and beguiled I let myself be,&nbsp;&nbsp;XX. 7</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Too strong for me, Thou hast conquered,</l>
<l>A jest I have been all the day,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Every one mocks me.</l>
<l>As oft as I speak I must shriek,&nbsp;&nbsp;8</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Crying <q>Violence and spoil.</q></l>
<l>Yea, the Word of the Lord is become my reproach</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>All day a derision.</l>
<l>If I said, I'll not mind Him<note place='foot'>Greek <hi rend='italic'>the
name of the Lord</hi>.</note>&nbsp;&nbsp;9</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Nor speak in His name,<note place='foot'>Greek; Hebrew adds
<hi rend='italic'>any more</hi>.</note></l>
<l>Then in my heart 'tis a burning fire,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Shut up in my bones.</l>
<l>I am worn away with refraining,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>I cannot hold on.<note place='foot'>So Greek.</note></l>
<l>For I hear the whispering of many,&nbsp;&nbsp;10</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Terror all round!</l>
<l><q>Denounce, and let us denounce him,</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>&mdash;And these my familiars!&mdash;</l>
<pb n='331'/><anchor id='Pg331'/>
<l>Keep ye watch for him tripping,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Perchance he'll be fooled,</l>
<l><q rend='pre'>And we be more than enough for him,</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='post'>And get our revenge.</q></l>
<l>Yet the Lord He is with me,&nbsp;&nbsp;11</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Mighty and Terrible!</l>
<l>So they that hunt me shall stumble</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And shall not prevail.</l>
<l>Put to dire shame shall they be</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>When they fail to succeed.</l>
<l>Be their confusion eternal,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Nor ever forgotten!</l>
<l>O Lord,<note place='foot'>Hebrew adds <hi rend='italic'>of Hosts</hi>.</note>
Who triest the righteous,&nbsp;&nbsp;12</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Who lookest to the reins and the heart,</l>
<l>Let me see Thy vengeance upon them,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>For to Thee I have opened my cause.<note place='foot'>Verse
13, a doxology, is probably a later addition.</note></l>
</lg>
<lg>
<l>Cursed be the day,&nbsp;&nbsp;XX. 14</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Whereon I was born!</l>
<l>The day that my mother did bare me,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Be it unblessed!</l>
<l>Cursed be the man who carried the news,&nbsp;&nbsp;15</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Telling my father,</l>
<l><q>A man child is born to thee!</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Making him glad.</l>
<l>Be that man as the cities the Lord overthrew,&nbsp;&nbsp;16</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And did not relent,</l>
<l>Let him hear a shriek in the morning,</l>
<pb n='332'/><anchor id='Pg332'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And at noon-tide alarms;</l>
<l>That he slew me not in<note place='foot'>So Greek.</note> the womb,&nbsp;&nbsp;17</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>So my mother had been my grave,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And great for ever her womb!</l>
<l>For what came I forth from the womb?&nbsp;&nbsp;18</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Labour and sorrow to see,</l>
<l>That my days in shame should consume.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Considering the passion of these lines, it is not
surprising that they are so irregular.<note place='foot'>Cp. xviii. 20 f. p.
<ref target="Pg329">329</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
Some have attributed the aggravations, at least,
of this rage to some fault in the man himself.
They are probably right. The prophets were
neither vegetables nor machines but men of
like passions with ourselves. Jeremiah may have
been by temper raw and hasty, with a natural
capacity for provoking his fellows. That he felt
this himself we may suspect from his cry to his
mother, that he had been born to quarrel. His
impatience, honest though it be, needs stern
rebuke from the Lord.<note place='foot'>xii. 5; cp.
xv. 19.</note> Even with God Himself
he is hasty.<note place='foot'>iv. 10; p.
<ref target="Pg322">322</ref>; xv. 18.</note> There are signs throughout,
naïvely betrayed by his own words, of a fluid
and quick temper, both for love and for hate. For
so original a poet he was at first remarkably dependent
on his predecessors. The cast of his
verse is lyric and subjective; and for all its wistfulness
and plaint is sometimes shrill with the
shrillness of a soul raw and too sensitive about
<pb n='333'/><anchor id='Pg333'/>
herself. His strength as a poet may have been his
weakness as a man&mdash;may have made him, from a
human point of view, an unlikely instrument for
the work he had to do and the force with which
he must drive&mdash;painfully swerving at times from
his task, and at others rushing in passion before
the power he hated but could not withstand.
</p>

<p>
So probable an opinion becomes a certainty when
we turn to God's words to him. <hi rend='italic'>Be not dismayed
lest I make thee dismayed</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>I set thee this day a fenced
city and wall of bronze</hi>.<note place='foot'>i. 17 f.;
cp. xv. 19.</note> For these last imply that
in himself Jeremiah was something different.
God does not speak thus to a man unless He sees
that he needs it. It was to his most impetuous
and unstable disciple that Christ said, <hi rend='italic'>Thou art
Peter, and on this rock will I build</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Yet while his own temper thus aggravated his
solitude and his pain we must also keep in mind
that neither among the priests, the prophets and
the princes of his time, nor in the kings after
Josiah, did Jeremiah find any of that firm material
which under the hands of Isaiah rose into bulwarks
against Assyria. The nation crumbling
from within was suffering from without harder
blows than even Assyria dealt it. These did not
weld but broke a people already decadent and
with nothing to resist them save the formalities of
religion and a fanatic gallantry. The people lost
heart and care. He makes them use more than
<pb n='334'/><anchor id='Pg334'/>
once a phrase about themselves in answer to his
call to repent: <hi rend='italic'>No'ash, No use! All is up!</hi> Probably
this reflects his own feelings about them.
He was a man perpetually baffled by what he
had to work with.
</p>

<p>
Poet as he was he had the poet's heart for the
beauties of nature and of domestic life: for birds
and trees and streams, for the home-candle and
the sound of the house-mill, for children and the
happiness of the bride, and the love of husband
and wife; and he was forbidden to marry or have
children of his own or to take part in any social
merriment&mdash;in this last respect so different from
our Lord. Was it unnatural that his heart broke
out now and then in wild gusts of passion against
it all?
</p>

<p>
There is another thing which we must not
forget in judging Jeremiah's excessive rage. We
cannot find that he had any hope of another life.
Absolutely no breath of this breaks either from
his own Oracles or from those attributed to him.
Here and now was his only chance of service,
here and now must the visions given him by God
be fulfilled or not at all. In the whole book of
Jeremiah we see no hope of the resurrection, no
glory to come, no gleam even of the martyr's
crown. I have often thought that what seem to
us the excess of impatience, the rashness to argue
with Providence, the unholy wrath and indignation
of prophets and psalmists under the Old
<pb n='335'/><anchor id='Pg335'/>
Covenant, are largely to be explained by this,
that as yet there had come to them no sense of
another life or of judgment beyond this earth.
When we are tempted to wonder at Jeremiah's
passion and cursing, let us try to realise how we
would have felt had we, like him, found our <emph>one</emph>
service baffled, and the <emph>single</emph> possible fulfilment
of our ideals rendered vain. All of which shows
the difference that Christ has made.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index="toc"/>
<head>2. Predestination. (I, XVIII, etc.)</head>

<p>
Yet though such a man in such an age Jeremiah
is sped through it with a force, which in spite of
him never fails and which indeed carries his influence
to the end of his nation's history.
</p>

<p>
What was the powder which launched this
grim projectile through his times? Part at least
was his faith in his predestination, the bare sense
that God Almighty meant him from before his
beginning for the work, and was gripping him to
it till the close. This alone prevailed over his
reluctant nature, his protesting affections, and his
adverse circumstance.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Before in the body I built thee, I knew thee,</l>
<l>Before thou wast forth from the womb, I had put thee apart,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>I have set thee a prophet to the nations.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<pb n='336'/><anchor id='Pg336'/>

<p>
From the first and all through it was God's choice
of him, the knowledge of himself as a thought of
the Deity and a consecrated instrument of the
Divine Will, which grasped this unbraced and
sensitive creature, this alternately discouraged
and impulsive man, and turned him, as we have
seen, into the opposite of himself.
</p>

<p>
The writers of the Old Testament give full
expression to the idea of predestination, but what
they understand by it is not what much of Jewish
and Christian theology has understood. In the
Old Testament predestination is not to character
or fate, to salvation or its opposite, to eternal life
or eternal punishment, but to service, or some
particular form of service, for God and man. The
Great Evangelist of the Exile so defines it for
Israel as a whole: Israel an eternal purpose of
God for the enlightenment and blessing of mankind.
And this faith is enforced on the nation, not
for their pride nor to foster the confidence that
God will never break from them, but to rouse their
conscience, and give them courage when they are
feeble or indolent or hopeless of their service.
So with Jeremiah in regard both to his own predestination
and that of his people. In his Parable
of the Potter (as we have seen) it is for service as
vessels that the clay is moulded; God is revealed
not as predestining character or quality, but as
shaping characters for ends for which under His
hand they yield suitable qualities. The parable
<pb n='337'/><anchor id='Pg337'/>
illustrates not arbitrariness of election nor irresistible
sovereignty but a double freedom&mdash;freedom
in God to change His decrees for moral
reasons, freedom on man's part to thwart God's
designs for him. In further illustration of this
remember again the wonderful words, <hi rend='italic'>Be thou not
dismayed before them, lest I make thee dismayed; if
thou wilt turn, then shall I turn thee</hi>. To work upon
man God needs man's own will.
</p>

<p>
From imagining the Deity as sheer absolute
will, to which the experience of the resistless force
behind his own soul must sometimes have tempted
him, Jeremiah was further guarded by his visions
of the Divine working in Nature. He is never
more clear or musical than when singing of the
regularity, faithfulness and reasonableness of
this. With such a Creator, such a Providence,
there could be neither arbitrariness nor caprice.
</p>

<p>
Having this experience of God's ways with man
it was not possible for Jeremiah to succumb to
those influences of a strong unqualified faith in
predestination which have often overwhelmed the
personalities of its devotees. Someone has talked
of <q>the wine of predestination,</q> and history both
in the East and in the West furnishes cases of men
so drugged by it as to lose their powers of will,
reason and heart, and become either apathetic unquestioning
slaves of fate, or violent and equally
unquestioning dogmatists and tyrants&mdash;the soul-less
instruments of a pitiless force. God overpowers
<pb n='338'/><anchor id='Pg338'/>
them: He is all and they are nothing. It
was far otherwise with Jeremiah, who realised and
preserved his individuality not only as against the
rest of his people but as against God Himself.
His earlier career appears from the glimpses we
get of it to have been, if not a constant, yet a
frequent struggle with the Deity. He argues
against the Divine calls to him. And even when
he yields he expresses his submission in terms
which almost proudly define his own will as over
against that of God:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Lord thou beguiledst me, and I let myself be beguiled,</l>
<l>Thou wast stronger than I and hast conquered.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
The man would not be mastered, but if mastered
is not crushed. He questions each moment of his
own sufferings, each moment of his people's oncoming
doom. He debates with God on matters
of justice. He wrestles things out with God and
emerges from each wrestle not halt and limping
like Jacob of old, but firm and calm, more clear in
his mind and more sure of himself&mdash;as we see him
at last when the full will of God breaks upon his
soul with the Battle of Carchemish and he calmly
surrenders to his own and his people's fate. That
is how this prophet, by nature so fluid, and so
shrinking stands out henceforth <hi rend='italic'>a fenced city and a
wall of bronze over against the whole people of the land</hi>:
the one unbreakable figure in the breaking-up of
<pb n='339'/><anchor id='Pg339'/>
the state and the nation. We perceive the method
in God's discipline of such a soul. He sees his
servant's weakness and grants him the needful
athletic for it, by wrestling with him Himself.
</p>

<p>
We may here take in full the remarkable passage,
part of which we have already studied.<note place='foot'>See above, p.
<ref target="Pg160">160</ref>.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Too Righteous art Thou, O Lord,&nbsp;&nbsp;XII. 1</l>
<l>That with Thee I should argue.</l>
<l>Yet cases there are I must speak with Thee of:&mdash;</l>
<l>The way of the wicked&mdash;why doth it prosper,</l>
<l>And the treacherous all be at ease?</l>
<l>Thou did'st plant them, yea they take root,&nbsp;&nbsp;2</l>
<l>They get on, yea they make fruit;</l>
<l>Near in their mouths art Thou,</l>
<l>But far from their reins.</l>
<l>But me, O Lord, Thou hast known,<note place='foot'>Hebrew adds,
<hi rend='italic'>Thou seest me</hi>.</note>&nbsp;&nbsp;3</l>
<l>And tested my heart with Thee;</l>
<l>Drag them out like sheep for the shambles,</l>
<l>To the day of slaughter devote them.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thou hast run with the foot and they wore thee&mdash;&nbsp;&nbsp;5</l>
<l>How wilt thou vie with the horse?</l>
<l>If in peaceful country thou can'st not trust,</l>
<l>How wilt thou do in the rankness of Jordan?</l>
<pb n='340'/><anchor id='Pg340'/>
<l>For even thy brothers, the house of thy father,&nbsp;&nbsp;6</l>
<l>Even they have betrayed thee.</l>
<l>Even they have called after thee loudly,</l>
<l>Trust them not, though they speak thee fair.<note place='foot'>See also p.
<ref target="Pg160">160</ref>. Verse 4 is clearly out of place here, referring
to a hardly relevant subject. Verse 6 is less improbable
an illustration of the harder troubles in store for the prophet.
There is no reason to doubt the genuineness of the rest: <hi rend='italic'>Thou
can'st not trust</hi>, so Greek; Hebrew <hi rend='italic'>thou art trusting</hi>. Hitzig,
etc., by changing one consonant read <hi rend='italic'>thou art fleeing</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>Rankness</hi> lit. <hi rend='italic'>pride</hi> or
<hi rend='italic'>extravagance</hi>. If verse 6 is original, the date of
the whole is early.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The rankness</hi> or <hi rend='italic'>luxuriance of Jordan</hi> is
the jungle on both sides of the river, in which the lions lie.
This then is all the answer that the wearied and
perplexed servant gets from his Lord. The
troubles of which he complains are but the training
for still sorer. The only meaning of the
checks and sorrows of life is to brace us for worse.
It is the strain that ever brings the strength. Life
is explained as a graded and progressively strenuous
discipline, the result of it a stronger and more
finely tempered soul. But this surely suggests
the questions: Is that the whole result? Is the
soul thus to be trained, braced and refined, only
at last to be broken and vanish? These are
natural questions to the Lord's answer, but
Jeremiah does not put them. Unlike Job he
makes no start, even with this stimulus, to break
through to another life.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='341'/><anchor id='Pg341'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>3. Sacrifice.</head>

<p>
But in thus achieving his individuality over
against both his nation and his God, Jeremiah accomplished
only half of the work he did for Israel
and mankind. It is proof of how great a prophet
we have in him that he who was the first in Israel
to realise the independence of the single self in
religion should also become the supreme example
under the Old Covenant of the sacrifice of that
self for others, that he should break from one type
of religious solidarity only to illustrate another
and a nobler, that the prophet of individuality
should be also the symbol if not the conscious
preacher of vicariousness. This further stage in
Jeremiah's experience is of equally dramatic interest,
though we cannot always trace the order
of his utterances which bear witness to it.
</p>

<p>
There must often have come to him the
temptation to break loose from a people who
deserved nothing of him, but cruelly entreated
him, and who themselves were so manifestly
doomed. Once at least he confesses this.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>O that I had in the wilderness&nbsp;&nbsp;IX. 2</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>A wayfarers' lodge!</l>
<l>Then would I leave my people,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And get away from them;</l>
<l>For adulterers all of them be,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>A bundle of traitors.</l>
<pb n='342'/><anchor id='Pg342'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>They stretch their tongues&nbsp;&nbsp;3</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Like a falsing bow,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And never for truth</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Use their power in the land.</l>
<l>But from evil to evil go forth</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And Me they know not!<note place='foot'>See above, p.
<ref target="Pg202">202</ref>.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Well might the Prophet wish to escape from
such a people&mdash;worn out with their falsehood,
their impurity, and their senseless optimism. Yet
it is not solitude for which he prays but some inn
or caravanserai where he would have been less
lonely than in his unshared house in Jerusalem,
<hi rend='italic'>sitting alone because of the wrath of the Lord</hi>. His
desire is to be set where a man may see all the
interest of passing life without any responsibility
for it, where men are wayfarers only and come
and go like a river on whose bank you lie, and
help you to muse and perhaps to sing but never
touch the heart or the conscience of you. It is
the prayer of a poet sick of being a prophet and a
tester. Jeremiah was weary of having to look
below the surface of life, to know people long
enough to judge them with a keener conscience
than their own and to love them with a hopeless
and breaking heart that never got an answer to its
love or to its calls for repentance&mdash;wearied with
watching habit slowly grow from ill to ill, old
truths become lies or at the best mere formalities,
<pb n='343'/><anchor id='Pg343'/>
prophets who only flattered, priests to bless them,
and the people loving to have it so.<note place='foot'>v. 31; p.
<ref target="Pg125">125</ref>.</note> O to have
no other task in life than to watch the street from
the balcony!
</p>

<p>
But our prayers often outrun themselves in the
utterance and Jeremiah's too carried with it its
denial. <hi rend='italic'>My people&mdash;that I might leave my people</hi>&mdash;this,
it is clear from all that we have heard from
him, his heart would never suffer him to do. And
so gradually we find him turning with deeper
devotion to the forlorn hope of his ministry, his
fate to feel his judgment of his people grow ever
more despairing, but his love for them deeper and
more yearning.
</p>

<p>
From the year of Carchemish onward he appears
not again to have tried or prayed to escape.
Through the rest of the reign of Jehoiakim they
persecuted him to the edge of death. Prophets
and priests called for his execution. He was
stoned, beaten and thrust into the stocks. The
king scornfully cut up the roll of his prophecies;
and the people following their formalist leaders
rejected his word. With the first captivity under
Jehoiakim all the better classes left Jerusalem, but
he elected to remain with the refuse. When in
the reign of Ṣedekiah the Chaldeans came down
on the city and Jeremiah counselled its surrender
he was again beaten and was flung into a pit to
starve to death. When he was freed and the
<pb n='344'/><anchor id='Pg344'/>
besiegers gave him the opportunity, he would not
go over to them. Even when the city had fallen
and her captors hearing of his counsel offered him
security and a position in Babylonia, he chose
instead to share the fortunes of the little remnant
left in their ruined land. When they broke up it
was the worst of them who took possession of his
person and disregarding his appeals hurried him
down to Egypt. There, on alien soil and among
countrymen who had given themselves to an alien
religion, the one great personality of his time, who
had served the highest interests of his nation for
forty years, reluctant but unfaltering, and whose
scorned words, every one, had been vindicated by
events, is with the dregs of his people swept from
our sight. <hi rend='italic'>He had given his back to the smiters and
his cheeks to them who plucked out the hair; he had not
hidden his face from the shame and the spitting. He
was a man of sorrows and acquainted with grief. He
was taken from prison and from judgment and cut off
from the land of the living; and they made his grave
with the wicked, though he had done no violence neither
was deceit in his mouth.</hi> It is the second greatest
sacrifice that Israel has offered for mankind.
</p>

<p>
If Jeremiah thus of his own will suffered <emph>with</emph>
his people, and to the bitter end with the worst of
them, was he also conscious of suffering <emph>for</emph> them?
After his death, when the full tragedy of his life
came home to his people's heart, the sense of the
few suffering for the many, the righteous for the
<pb n='345'/><anchor id='Pg345'/>
sinners, began to be articulate in Israel&mdash;remarkably
enough, let us remember, in the very period
when owing to the break-up of the nation the
single soul came to its own and belief in the responsibility
of every man for his own sins also
emerged and prevailed. Of the influence of the
example of Jeremiah's spiritual loneliness, combined
with his devotion to his sinful people, in
developing these doctrines of individualism and
self-sacrifice for others there can be no doubt.
The stamp of his sufferings is on every passage
in that exilic work <q>Isaiah</q> XL-LXVI, which
presents the Suffering Servant of the Lord and
declares the atoning virtues of His Agonies and
Death.
</p>

<p>
But it is not clear that Jeremiah ever felt anything
of this about himself; if he did so he has refrained
from uttering it. Yet he must have been
very near so high a consciousness. His love and
his pity for his sinful people were full. He can
hardly have failed to descry that his own spiritual
agonies which brought him into so close a
personal communion with God would show to
every other man the way for his approach also to
the Most High and Holy and his reconciliation
with his God. Again he was weighed down with
his people's sins; he bore on his heart the full
burden of them. He confessed them. The shame
which the people did not feel for them, he felt;
and he painted the curse upon them in words
<pb n='346'/><anchor id='Pg346'/>
which prove how deeply the iron had entered his
own soul. He had a profound sense of the engrained
quality of evil,<note place='foot'>ii. 22 f.; xiii. 23;
xvi. 12; xvii. 1; etc.</note> the deep saturation of sin,
the enormity of the guilt of those who sinned
against the light and love of God.<note place='foot'>ii.
11-13, 22, 25, 31 f.</note> A fallacy of
his day was that God could easily and would
readily forgive sin, that the standard ritual might
at once atone for it and comfortable preaching
bring the assurance of its removal. He denied
this, and affirmed that such things do not change
character; that no wash of words can cleanse
from sin, no sacraments, however ancient, can
absolve from guilt.<note place='foot'>ii. 35; v. 31;
vii. 4-11, 21 ff.; xi. 15; xiv. 12.</note> That way only strict and
painful repentance can work; repentance following
the deep searching of the heart by the Word
and the Judgments of God and the agony of learning
and doing His Will.<note place='foot'>iv. 3,
4; vii. 3 ff. etc.</note> To its last dregs he
drank the cup of the Lord's wrath upon His false
and wilful nation; he suffered with them every
pang of the slow death their sins had brought
upon them. And yet he was most conscious of
his own innocence when most certain of his fate.
The more he loyally gave himself to his mission
the more he suffered and the nearer was he
brought to death. The tragedy perplexed him,
</p>

<pb n='347'/><anchor id='Pg347'/>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Why is my pain perpetual,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>My wound past healing?<note place='foot'>xv. 18.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
The only reply he heard from heaven was the
order to stand fast, for God was with him to deliver&mdash;but
that more troubles awaited him. And
beyond this what is there to answer the staggering
Prophet save that if a man have the Divine gifts
of a keener conscience and a more loving heart
than his fellows, there inevitably comes with
such gifts the obligation of suffering for them.
Every degree in which love stands above her
brethren means pain and shame to love though
as yet she bear no thorn or nail in her flesh.
This spiritual distress Jeremiah felt for the people
long before he shared with them the physical
penalties of their sins. Just there&mdash;in his keener
conscience, in his hot shame for sins not his as
if they were his, in his agony for his people's
estrangement from God and in his own constantly
wounded love&mdash;lay his real substitution, his
vicarious offering for his people.
</p>

<p>
Did Jeremiah ever conceive the far-off fulness
of the travail thus laid upon his soul, the truth
that this vicarious agony of a righteous man for
the sins of others is borne by God Himself? To
that question we have only fragments of an
answer. In his discourses, both earlier and later,
when he talks directly in the Name of the Deity&mdash;when
<pb n='348'/><anchor id='Pg348'/>
the Deity speaks in the first person&mdash;the
words breathe as much effort and passion as
when Jeremiah speaks in his own person. The
Prophet is very sure that his God is Love, and he
hears that love utter itself in tones of yearning
for the love of men, and even of agony for their
sin and misery. There is, too, a singular prayer
of his which is tense with the instinct, that God
would surely be to Israel what Jeremiah had
resolved and striven to be&mdash;not a far-off God
who occasionally visited or passed through His
people, but One in their midst sharing their pain;
not indifferent, as he fears in another
place,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Debase
not the throne of Thy Glory</hi>, xiv. 21.</note> to
the shame that is upon them, but bearing even
this. The prayer which I mean is the one in
XIV. 8, 9, which recalls not only the terms but
the essence of Jeremiah's longing to escape from
his people, and lodge afar with wayfaring men,
aloof and irresponsible.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>O Hope of Israel, His Saviour</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>In time of trouble.</l>
<l>Why be like a passenger through the land,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Or the wayfaring guest of a night?</l>
<l>Yet Lord Thou art in our midst,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Do not forsake us.<note place='foot'>xiv. 8, 9; see p.
<ref target="Pg057">57</ref>.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
I may be going too far in interpreting the
longing and faith that lie behind these words.
<pb n='349'/><anchor id='Pg349'/>
But they come out very fully in later prophets
who explicitly assert that the Divine Nature does
dwell with men, shares their ethical warfare and
bears the shame of their sins. And the truth of
it all was manifested past doubt in the Incarnation,
the Passion and the Cross of the Son of
God.
</p>

<p>
But whether Jeremiah had instinct of it, as I
have ventured to think from his prayer, or had
not, he foreshadowed, as far as mere man can, the
sufferings of Jesus Christ for men&mdash;and this is his
greatest glory as a prophet.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='350'/><anchor id='Pg350'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<anchor id="Lecture_VIII"/>
<index index='toc' level1='Lecture VIII. God, Man And The New Covenant.'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Lecture VIII.'/>
<head type='sub'>Lecture VIII.</head>
<head>God, Man And The New Covenant.</head>

<p>
We have followed the career of Jeremiah from
his call onwards to the end, and we have traced
his religious experience with its doubts, struggles,
crises, and settlement at last upon the things that
are sure: his debates with God and strifes with
men, which while they roused him to outbursts
of passion also braced his will, and stilled the
wilder storms of his heart. There remains the
duty of gathering the results of this broken and
gusty, yet growing and fruitful experience: the
truths which came forth of its travail, about
God and Man and their relations. And in particular
we have still to study the ideal form
which Jeremiah, or (as some questionably argue)
one of his disciples, gave to these relations: the
New Covenant, new in contrast to God's ancient
Covenant with Israel as recorded and enforced
in the Book of Deuteronomy.
</p>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>1. God.</head>

<p>
Among the surprises which Jeremiah's own
Oracles have for the student is the discovery of
how little they dwell upon the transcendent and
<pb n='351'/><anchor id='Pg351'/>
infinite aspects of the Divine Nature. On these
Jeremiah adds almost nothing to what his predecessors
or contemporaries revealed. Return
to his original visions and contrast them with
those, for example, of Isaiah and Ezekiel.
</p>

<p>
Isaiah's vision was of the Lord upon a Throne,
high and lifted up, surrounded by Seraphim
crying to one another, <hi rend='italic'>Holy, Holy, Holy is the
Lord of Hosts! the whole earth is full of His Glory!</hi>
And their voices rocked the Temple and filled
it with smoke. Here are a Presence, Awful
Majesty, Infinite Holiness and Glory, blinding
the seer and crushing his heart contrite. Or
take the inaugural vision of Ezekiel&mdash;the storm-wind
out of the North, the vast cloud, the fire
infolding itself, the brightness round about and
out of the midst thereof as the colour of amber;
the rush and whirl of life that followed, wheels
and wings and rings full of eyes; and over this
the likeness of a firmament of the colour of the
terrible ice and the sound of wings like the noise
of many waters, as the Voice of the Almighty and
above the firmament a Throne and on the Throne
the Appearance of a Man, the Appearance of
the likeness of the Glory of the Lord. <hi rend='italic'>And I,
when I saw it, fell upon my face.</hi>
</p>

<p>
In the inaugural visions of Jeremiah there is
none of this Awfulness&mdash;only <hi rend='italic'>What art thou seeing
Jeremiah? the branch of an almond tree ... a caldron
boiling.</hi> That was characteristic of his encounters
<pb n='352'/><anchor id='Pg352'/>
and intercourse with the Deity throughout. They
were constant and close, but in them all we are
aware only of a Voice and an Argument. There
is no Throne, no Appearance, no Majesty, no
overwhelming sense of Holiness and Glory, no
rush of wings nor floods of colour or of song.<note place='foot'>x.
1-16 is a later writer's; see p. <ref target="Pg207">207</ref>.</note>
Jeremiah takes for granted what other prophets
have said of God. But the Deity whose Power
and Glory they revealed is his Familiar. The
Lord talks with Jeremiah as a man with his
fellow.
</p>

<p>
For this there were several reasons, and first
the particular quality of the Prophet's imagination.
His native powers of vision were not
such as soar, or at any rate easily soar, to the
sublime. He was a lyric poet and his revelations
of God are subjective and given to us by glimpses
in scattered verses, which, however intimate and
exquisite, have not the adoring wonder of his
prophetic peers.
</p>

<p>
Again there were the startled recoil of his
nature from the terrible office of a prophet in
such times, and those born gifts of questioning
and searching which fitted him for his allotted
duty as Tester of his people,<note place='foot'>vi.
27; see pp. <ref target="Pg132">132</ref>,
<ref target="Pg133">133</ref>.</note> but which he also
turned upon the Providence and Judgments of
the Lord Himself.<note place='foot'>xii. 1 ff.,
etc.</note> His religious experience,
as we have seen, was largely a struggle with
<pb n='353'/><anchor id='Pg353'/>
the Divine Will, and it left him not adoring but
amazed and perplexed. Such wrestling man's
spirit has to encounter like Jacob of old in the
dark, and if like the Patriarch it craves the Name,
which is the Nature, of That with which it
struggles, all the answer it may get is another
question, <hi rend='italic'>Wherefore askest thou after My Name?</hi>
Morning may break, as it broke on Jacob by
Jabbok with the assurance of blessing or as on
Jeremiah with a firmer impression of the Will not
his own; but no strength is left to glory in the
Nature behind the Will. There is a horrified
breathlessness about his lines&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Thou wast stronger than I and hast conquered,</l>
<l>The Lord is with me as a Mighty and Terrible.<note place='foot'>xx. 7, 11.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
From his struggles he indeed issues more sure
of God and finally more trustful in Him, as is
testified by his fair song on the beauty and fruitfulness
of faith, beginning
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Blessed the wight that trusts in the Lord,</l>
<l>And the Lord is his trust.<note place='foot'>xvii. 7 f.; p.
<ref target="Pg054">54</ref>.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
But even here is none of the awe and high wonder
which fall upon Israel through other prophets.
Lyrist as he is and subjective, Jeremiah dwells
not so much upon the attributes of God on which
faith rests as upon the effects of faith in man.
</p>

<p>
Again by the desperate character of the times
he was starved of hope, the hope by which the
<pb n='354'/><anchor id='Pg354'/>
Apostle says <hi rend='italic'>we are saved</hi>, which not only braces
the will but clears the inner eyes of men and
liberates the imagination. As the years went
on he was ever more closely bound to the prediction
of his people's ruin, and, when this came,
to the sober counsel to accept their fate and settle
down to a long exile in patience for the Lord's
time of deliverance. As we have seen, his intervals
of release from so grim a ministry were
brief, and his Oracles of a bright future but few.
Even in these he does not rise, like the Evangelist
of the Exile whom he inspired, to exultation in
the Almighty Power of God or to visions of vast
spaces of the Divine Providence, or of Israel's
service wide as the world. His happy peasant-heart
is content to foresee his restored people
tending their vineyards again, enjoying their
village dances and festivals, and sharing with
their long divided tribes the common national
worship upon Ṣion.<note place='foot'>See above,
p. <ref target="Pg299">299</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
Like those of all the prophets Jeremiah's most
immediate convictions of God are that He has
done, and is always doing or about to do, things.<note place='foot'>Shortly
before his death, Professor A. B. Davidson said to
me, <q>These prophets were terribly one-idea'd men</q>&mdash;their one
idea being that the Lord was about to do something.</note>
From the first Yahweh of Israel had been to the
faith of his people a God of Deeds. He delivered
them from Egypt, led them through the desert,
<pb n='355'/><anchor id='Pg355'/>
ever ready to avenge them on any who molested
them, and He had brought them to a land of
delight.<note place='foot'>ii., iii.
<hi rend='italic'>passim</hi>.</note> By his creative and guiding Word,
always clear and potential,<note place='foot'>ii.
31.</note> He had planted them
and built them up to be a nation. These were
the proofs of Him&mdash;ever operative, effective and
victorious both over their foes and over every
natural obstacle which their life encountered.
And being <hi rend='italic'>the Living God</hi> He still works and is
ready to work, would His people only seek
where!<note place='foot'>ii. 8; <hi rend='italic'>Where
is the Lord?</hi></note> He is awake, watching over His
Word <hi rend='italic'>to perform it</hi> and controlling the
nations.<note place='foot'>i. 12 ff.</note>
It is He who has made the earth and gives it to
whom He will,<note place='foot'>xxvii.
5.</note> who prepares the destroyers
of His people, who calls for the kingdoms of
the North, even for the far Scythians beyond
the edge of the world, to execute His purposes.<note place='foot'>xxii.
7; i. 15; iv. 6; v. 15, etc.</note>
He brings the King of Babylon against Jerusalem,
and recalls the Chaldeans to their interrupted
siege of the city, gives it into their hands and
Himself banishes its people.<note place='foot'>xxii. 25 f.; xxiv.
8 ff.; xxv. 9; xxvii. 6; xxxii. 3; xxxiv. 2, 22.</note> He moulds the
nations for his own ends, and if they fail Him,
decrees their destruction.<note place='foot'>xviii.
1-11.</note> His Word builds and
plants but also pulls up and tears down.<note place='foot'>i. 9 f.; etc.</note> He
is always near to guide or to argue with nations
<pb n='356'/><anchor id='Pg356'/>
and individuals, and to give directions and suggestions
of practical detail to His servants for
the interpretation and fulfilment of His purposes.<note place='foot'>ii.
9; xii. 1 ff.; xiii. 1; xviii. 1; xix. 1, xxiv. 1 f.; xxvii. 2;
xxxii. 6; xxxv. 2; xxxvi. 2, 28.</note>
</p>

<p>
It was all this activity and effectiveness, with
their sure results in history, which distinguished
Him from other gods, the gods of the nations,
who were ineffective, or as Jeremiah puts it
<hi rend='italic'>unprofitable&mdash;no-gods,
nothings</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>do-nothings, the work
of men's hands, lies</hi> or <hi rend='italic'>frauds</hi>,
and mere <hi rend='italic'>bubbles</hi>.<note place='foot'>ii.
5, 11; viii. 19 (?); xiv. 22; xvi. 19, 20; xviii. 15; xxxii.
30 (?), etc. <hi rend='italic'>Bubble</hi>, Hebrew <hi rend='italic'>hebel</hi>,
lit. <hi rend='italic'>breath</hi>, usually rendered
<hi rend='italic'>vanity</hi> by our versions.</note>
On this line Jeremiah's monotheism marks a
notable advance; for alongside of faith in the
Divine Unity and Sovereignty there had lingered
even in Deuteronomy a belief in the existence
of other gods.<note place='foot'>Deut. iv. 19
reconciles the two by saying that Yahweh
had assigned the gods to their respective
nations.</note> With Jeremiah every vestige
of this superstition is gone, and other gods consigned
to limbo once and for all.
</p>

<p>
Yet Jeremiah's monotheism, like that of all the
Hebrew prophets, is even more due to convictions
of the character of the God of Israel. We have
seen how he dwells on the Divine Love, faithful
and yearning for love in return, pleading and
patient even with its delinquent sons and
daughters;<note place='foot'>Above, pp.
<ref target="Pg187">187</ref> ff.; ii. 9, 31 f.;
iii. 12, 19; etc.</note> but equal to this is his emphasis on
<pb n='357'/><anchor id='Pg357'/>
the righteousness of the Most High, by all His
deeds <hi rend='italic'>working troth, justice, and judgment on the earth</hi>,
which are His delight and the knowledge of which
is man's only glory.<note place='foot'>ix. 24; cp.
v. 1 ff., etc.</note> He demands from His people
not sacrifices, which He never commanded to
their fathers, nor vows but a better life, justice
between man and man, and care for the weak
and the innocent.<note place='foot'>vii. 3
ff.; xxvi. 13. See above, pp. <ref target="Pg155">155</ref>
ff.</note> To know Him is to do justice
and right.<note place='foot'>xxii. 15
f.</note> Because the present generation have
fallen away from these, and practise and love
falsehood, slander, impurity, treacherous and
greedy violence, therefore God, being justice and
truth, must judge and condemn them: <hi rend='italic'>What else
can I do?</hi><note place='foot'>ix. 7; cp. ii. 9,
35; v. 7-9, 25.</note> The ethical necessity of the doom of
the people is clear to the Prophet from a very early
stage of his ministry,<note place='foot'>Not from the
very earliest; ii. and iii. utter pleadings rather
than condemnations.</note> and throughout, though
his heart struggles against it. But, if possible,
even more abhorrent to God than these sins
against domestic and civic piety in themselves, is
the fact that they are committed in the very face
of His Love and despite all its pleading. With
Jeremiah as with Hosea the sin against love is the
most hopeless and unpardonable, and this people
have sinned it to the utmost.
</p>

<pb n='358'/><anchor id='Pg358'/>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>As a woman is false to her fere,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Have ye been false to me.<note place='foot'>iii.
1 ff., 20.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Hence most deeply springs the Wrath of the
Lord, a Wrath on which Jeremiah broods and
explodes more frequently and fiercely than any
other prophet: <hi rend='italic'>I am full of the rage of the Lord; the
glow of His wrath; take the cup of the wine of this fury
at My hand and give all nations to whom I send thee
to drink of it; the fierce anger of the Lord shall not turn
until He have executed it.</hi><note place='foot'>vi. 11; iv.
8, 26; xxv. 15; xxx. 24 (also, but out of place in
xxiii. 20); cp. xiii. 12-14.</note> And He does execute it.
God's Wrath breaks out in His <hi rend='italic'>spurning</hi> of His
nation, in the hot names He calls it, <hi rend='italic'>adulteress</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>harlot</hi>, and in <hi rend='italic'>hating</hi>
it.<note place='foot'>ii. 20; iii. 3, 6 ff., 20; xii. 8.</note> He will not relent nor
pardon it, nor listen to prayer for it.<note place='foot'>iv. 28; v. 7;
vii. 16; xi. 14; xv. 1 ff.</note> He says,
<hi rend='italic'>I must myself take vengeance upon them. I shall not
spare nor pity them.</hi><note place='foot'>v. 9, 29; ix. 9; xxi.
7.</note> They will reel in the day of
their visitation. He will feed them with wormwood
and drug them with poison; He will suddenly
let fall on them anguish and terrors; He
will take His fan and winnow them out in the
gates of the land and as the passing chaff strew
them on the wind of the desert; the garden-land
withers to wilderness and its cities break down at
His presence and before His fierce anger; He will
<pb n='359'/><anchor id='Pg359'/>
make Jerusalem heaps and cast out the people
before His face. He will give them to be tossed
among the nations for a consternation, a reproach
and a proverb, for a taunt and a curse, in all places
whither He drives them: and will send after them
the sword, the famine, and the pestilence till they
be consumed.<note place='foot'>vi. 15; viii. 12; ix.
15 (xxiii. 15); xv. 7, 8; xiii. 24; xviii.
17; vi. 26; ix. 11; vii. 15; xxiv. 9, 10.</note>
</p>

<p>
The modern mind deems arbitrary such immediate
linking of physical and political disasters with
the Wrath of God against sin. But we have to
ponder the following. The Prophet was convinced
of the ethical necessity of that Wrath and
of its judgments on Judah&mdash;he was convinced before
they came to pass and he predicted them accurately,
from close observation of the political
conditions of his world and the character of his
people. Granted these and God's essential and
operative justice, the connection was natural:
<hi rend='italic'>What else can I do?</hi> It was clear that Judah both
deserved and needed punishment and equally clear
that the boiling North held the potentialities of
this, which were gradually shaping and irresistibly
approaching. Moreover, as Jeremiah insists, and
as the history both of nations and individuals has
frequently illustrated, there is a natural sequence
of disaster upon wrong-doing. <hi rend='italic'>Be thy scourge thine
own sin! Thy ways and thy deeds have done to thee
<pb n='360'/><anchor id='Pg360'/>
these things. Is it Me they provoke, saith the Lord,
Is it not themselves to the confusion of their faces?
Wherefore have these things come upon thee?&mdash;for the
mass of thy wickedness.</hi><note place='foot'>ii. 19;
iv. 18; vii. 19; xiii. 22.</note> As St. Paul says <hi rend='italic'>the
wages of sin</hi>, not the judge's penalty on sin but
the thing it naturally earns, <hi rend='italic'>is death</hi>. Now one of
Jeremiah's most acute and convincing experiences
as the <hi rend='italic'>Tester</hi> of his people,<note place='foot'>vi.
27-30; pp. <ref target="Pg132">132</ref> ff.</note> is his observation of
how all this worked out upon his own generation.
Not only were the war, the pestilence, and the
captivity, which were about to fall upon Jerusalem,
directly and obviously due to the perjury and
stupid pride of her rulers; but, as he more subtly
saw, the immorality of the whole people had been
disabling them, for years before, from meeting
these or any disasters except as sheer punishment
without place for repentance. Their previous
troubles had failed to sober or humble them or
rouse them. <hi rend='italic'>They would not accept correction</hi>, he says
of them more than once.<note place='foot'>ii. 30, v. 3.</note> To the Prophet's warnings
that God will judge them, they answer carelessly
or defiantly <hi rend='italic'>Not He!</hi> Instead of yielding to
the power which lies in all adversity to cleanse the
heart and brace the will they became incapable of
shame, indifferent to consequences, and so past
praying for.<note place='foot'>ii. 25; xviii. 12;
vi. 15; viii. 12; xi. 14; xiv. 11.</note> And in this they were fortified by
<pb n='361'/><anchor id='Pg361'/>
the specious dreams and lies of their false prophets,
continued to sin, and so fell to their doom,
abashed at last but unassoilable.<note place='foot'>v. 31; xiii.
25; xviii. 11 ff.; xxiii. 14-17; xxvii. 9; xxviii.
15.</note> If at any time
they were startled by disaster, this found them
too enfeebled even for repentance by their habitual
insincerity or self-indulgence; which made them
incapable of truth even under pain, and of a real
conversion to God.<note place='foot'>iii. 21-25, a
vain confession of sin by the people which meets
only with a sterner call from God (iv. 3-4; see pp.
<ref target="Pg102">102</ref> f., <ref target="Pg107">107</ref> f.)
and was, as the subsequent years proved, ineffective;
cp. xviii. 15.</note> All this is discovered to us
by the eyes and the mouth of Jeremiah. What
in it is arbitrary? The record is awful, nothing
like it in literature. Yet every step is real. We
follow a master of observation.
</p>

<p>
But perhaps the chief glory of our Prophet is
that while thus delivering, as no other prophet
so fully or so ethically does, the just wrath of
God upon sin, he reveals at the same time that
His people's sin costs God more pain than anger.
This no doubt Jeremiah learned through his own
heart. As we have seen, with his whole heart he
loved the people whom he was called to test and
expose, and that heart was wracked and torn by
thoughts of the Doom which he had to pronounce
upon them. So also, he was given to feel, was
the heart of their God. In the following questions
there is poignant surprise; an insulted, a
wounded love beats through them.
</p>

<pb n='362'/><anchor id='Pg362'/>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>What wrong found your fathers in Me,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>That so far they broke from Me?</l>
<l>Have I been a desert to Israel,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Or land of thick darkness?</l>
<l>Why say my folk, <q rend='pre'>We are off,</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='post'>No more to meet Thee!</q></l>
<l>Can a maiden forget her adorning</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Or her girdle the bride?</l>
<l>Yet Me have My people forgotten</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Days without number.<note place='foot'>ii. 5, 31, 32.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
So, too, when the deserved doom threatens, and
in hate He has cast off His heritage, His love still
wonders how that can be&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Is My heritage to Me a speckled wild-bird</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>With the wild-birds round and against her?</l>
<l>Is Israel a slave,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Or house-born serf?</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Why he for a prey?<note place='foot'>xii. 7-9;
ii. 14.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
All the desolation of Judah is on Him alone: <hi rend='italic'>no
man lays it to heart, upon Me is the waste</hi>.<note place='foot'>xii.
11; cp. Gen. xlviii. 7.</note> And
what we have seen to be the most human touch
of all, the surprise of an outraged father at feeling,
beneath His wrath against a prodigal son, the
instincts of the ancient love which no wrath can
quench,
</p>

<pb n='363'/><anchor id='Pg363'/>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Is Ephraim My dearest son,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The child of delights?</l>
<l>That as oft as against him I speak</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>I must think of him still!<note place='foot'>xxxi.
20.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
That these instincts are so scattered rather increases
their cumulative effect.
</p>

<p>
Thus whether upon the Wrath or upon the
Love of God Jeremiah speaks home to the heart
of his own, and of our own and of every generation
which loves lies and lets itself be lulled by
them. Sin, he says, is no fiction nor a thing to
be lightly taken.<note place='foot'>I shall judge
thee for saying <q>I am guiltless</q>: ii.
35.</note> Time for repentance is short;
doom comes quickly. Habits of evil are not carelessly
parted with, but have their long and necessary
consequences moral and physical. No wash
of words nor worship nor sacrament can cleanse
the heart or redeem from guilt. It is not the
flagrant sinner whom he chiefly warns, but those
who harden themselves softly. And&mdash;very
firmly this&mdash;forgiveness is not easily granted by
God nor cheaply gained by men; God has not
only set our sins before His face but carries them
on His heart. And therefore, in view both of
the Just Wrath of the Most High and of His
suffering Love, only repentance can avail, the
repentance which is not the facile mood offered
by many in atonement for their sins, but arduous,
<pb n='364'/><anchor id='Pg364'/>
rigorous and deeply sincere in its anguish. All
of which carries our prophet, six centuries before
Christ came, very far <hi rend='italic'>into the fellowship of His
sufferings</hi>.
</p>

<p>
I have already spoken sufficiently of Jeremiah's
other original contributions to theology, on the
Freedom and the Patience of the Providence of
God, and his hope that God would be to Israel
what the prophet had bravely tried to be&mdash;no
transient guest but a dweller in their midst.<note place='foot'>Above,
pp. <ref target="Pg186">186</ref> ff.,
<ref target="Pg348">348</ref>.</note> The
titles for God which we may assume to have first
come from himself are few, perhaps only three:
<hi rend='italic'>The Fountain of Living Waters, the Hope of Israel and
the Saviour thereof in time of trouble</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>Hasidh, or
Loyal-in-Love</hi>,<note place='foot'>ii. 13; xiv. 8; xvii. 13;
iii. 12.</note> a term elsewhere applied only to
men. Sometimes, but not nearly so often as the
copyists of our Hebrew text have made him do,
he uses the title <hi rend='italic'>Yahweh of Hosts</hi>, doubtless in the
other prophets' sense of <hi rend='italic'>the forces of history and of
the Universe</hi> (the original meaning having been
<hi rend='italic'>the armies of Israel</hi>), sometimes he borrows the
deuteronomic <hi rend='italic'>Yahweh thy God</hi>, or a similar form.
But most often (as the Greek faithfully shows us)
it is simply the personal name <hi rend='italic'>Yahweh</hi> (Jehovah)
by which he addresses or describes the Deity:
significant of the long struggle between them as
individuals.
</p>

<p>
Passing now from the world of nations to the
<pb n='365'/><anchor id='Pg365'/>
world of nature we observe how little the genuine
Oracles of Jeremiah have to tell us of the Divine
Power over this; yet the little is proclaimed with
as firm assurance as of God's control of the
history of mankind. Both worlds are His: the
happenings in the one are the sacraments, the
signs and seals, of His purposes and tempers
towards the other: the winter blossom of the
almond, of His wakefulness in a world where all
seems asleep; the sun by day and the moon and
stars by night, of His everlasting faithfulness to
His own.<note place='foot'>i. 11 f.; xxxi. 35
f.</note> All things in nature obey His rule
though His own people do not; it is He who
rules the stormy sea and can alone bring rain.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Even the stork in the heavens</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Knoweth her seasons,</l>
<l>And dove, swift and swallow</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Keep time of their coming.</l>
<l>But My people&mdash;they know not</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The Rule of the Lord.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>I have set the sand as a bound for the sea,</l>
<l>An eternal decree that cannot be crossed.</l>
<l>Are there makers of rain 'mong the bubbles of the heathen?</l>
<l>Art Thou not He? ... all these Thou hast made.<note place='foot'>viii.
7; v. 22 (xxxi. 35); xiv. 22 (after the Greek); cp. iii. 3;
v. 24.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<pb n='366'/><anchor id='Pg366'/>

<p>
After all neither Nature nor the courses of
the Nations but the single human heart is the
field which Jeremiah most originally explores for
visions of the Divine Working and from which
he has brought his most distinctive contributions
to our knowledge of God. But that leads us up
to the second part of this lecture, his teaching
about man. Before beginning that, however, we
must include under his teaching about God, two
elements of this to which his insight into the
human heart directly led him.
</p>

<p>
First this great utterance of the Divine Omnipresence:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>I am a God who is near,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Not a God who is far.</l>
<l>Can any man hide him in secret,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And I not see him?</l>
<l>Do I not fill heaven and earth?&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Rede of the Lord.<note place='foot'>xxiii.
23 f.; above, p. <ref target="Pg256">256</ref>.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
These verses have been claimed as the earliest
expression in Israel of the Divine Omnipresence.<note place='foot'>By Smend.</note>
Amos, however, had given utterance to the same
truth though on a different plane of life.<note place='foot'>Amos ix. 2 ff.</note>
</p>

<p>
Second, and partly in logical sequence from
the preceding, but also stimulated by thoughts
of the best of Judah<note place='foot'>See above,
pp. <ref target="Pg238">238-241</ref>.</note> banished to a long exile,
<pb n='367'/><anchor id='Pg367'/>
Jeremiah was the first in Israel to assure his people
that the sense of God's presence, faith in His
Providence, His Grace, and Prayer to Him were
now free both of Temple and Land&mdash;as possible
on distant and alien soil, without Ark or Altar, as
they had been with these in Jerusalem. See his
Letter to the Exiles, and recall all that lay behind
it in his predictions of the ruin of the Temple,
and abolition of the Ark, and in his rejection
of sacrifices.<note place='foot'>xxix. 4-13; cp.
vii. 14, 21 ff.; iii. 16; and see above,
pp. <ref target="Pg143">143-159</ref>.</note> To Deuteronomy exile was the
people's punishment; to Jeremiah it is a fresh
opportunity of grace.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>2. Man and the New Covenant.</head>

<p>
In the earliest Oracles of Jeremiah nations are
the human units in religion, Israel as a whole the
object of the Divine affection and providence.
To his age worship was the business of the nation:
public reverence for symbols and institutions, and
rites in which the individual's share was largely
performed for him by official representatives.
The prophets, and Jeremiah himself at first, dealt
with the people as a moral unity from the earliest
times to their own. The Lord had loved and
sought, redeemed and tended them as a nation.
As a nation they fell away from Him and now they
were wholly false to Him. When Jeremiah first
urges them to return, it is of a public and general
<pb n='368'/><anchor id='Pg368'/>
repentance that he speaks, as Deuteronomy
had done; and when his urgency fails it is their
political disappearance which he pronounces for
doom.
</p>

<p>
But when the rotten surface of the national life
thus broke under the Prophet he fell upon the
deeper levels of the individual heart, and not only
found the native sinfulness of this to be the
explanation of the public and social corruption
but discovered also soil for the seed-bed of new
truths and new hopes. Among these there is
none more potent than that of the immediate
relation of the individual to God. Jeremiah never
lost hope of the ultimate restoration of Israel.
Nevertheless the individual aspects of religion
increase in his prophesying, and though it is
impossible to trace their growth with any accuracy
because of the want of dates to many of his Oracles,
we may be certain that as he watched under
Josiah the failure of the national movements for
reform, inspired by Deuteronomy, and under
Jehoiakim and Ṣedekiah the gradual breaking up
of the nation, and still more as his own personal
relations with the Deity grew closer, Jeremiah
thought and spoke less of the nation and more
of the individual as the object of the Divine
call and purposes.
</p>

<p>
One has travelled by night through a wooded
country, by night and on into the dawn. How
solid and indivisible the dark masses appear and
<pb n='369'/><anchor id='Pg369'/>
how difficult to realise as composed of innumerable
single growths, each with its own roots,
each by itself soaring towards heaven. But as
the dawn comes up one begins to see all this.
The mass breaks; first the larger, more lonely
trees stand out and soon every one of the
common crowd is apparent in its separate
strength and beauty.
</p>

<p>
It seems to me as I travel through the Book of
Jeremiah that here also is a breaking of dawn&mdash;but
they are men whom it reveals. There is a
stir of this even in the earliest Oracles; for the
form of address to the nation which has begun
with the singular <hi rend='italic'>Thou</hi> changes gradually to
<hi rend='italic'>You</hi>, and not <hi rend='italic'>Israel</hi> but
<hi rend='italic'>ye men of Israel</hi> are called to
turn to their God.<note place='foot'>See above, pp.
<ref target="Pg090">90</ref> ff.</note> As the Prophet's indictments
proceed his burden ceases to be the national
harlotry. He arraigns separate classes or groups,<note place='foot'>v.
1-5; viii. 8, scribes and wise; and prophets and priests
continually.</note>
and then, in increasing numbers, individuals:
brother deceiving brother and friend friend;
adulterers each after the wife of his neighbour;
the official bully Pashhur, Jehoiakim the atrocious
and petty in contrast to his sire the simple and
just Josiah, the helpless and ridiculous Ṣedekiah,
the bustling and self-confident Hananiah<note place='foot'>ix.
4 f.; v. 7 f.; xx. 3 f.; xxii. 13-18; xxxviii. 22; xxviii.
15 f.</note>&mdash;with
<pb n='370'/><anchor id='Pg370'/>
the fit word and in sharp irony Jeremiah etches
them separately, in the same vividness as the
typical figures of the harlot watching for her prey
like the Arab robber in the desert, the fowler
crouching to fling his net, the shepherds failing
to keep their scattered flocks, the prophets who
<hi rend='italic'>fling about their tongues and rede a rede of the
Lord</hi>.<note place='foot'>iii. 2; v. 26; x. 21; xxiii. 31.</note>
Jeremiah has answered the call to him to search
for the <emph>man</emph>, the men beneath the nation.<note place='foot'>v. 1.</note>
</p>

<p>
Then there are his readings of the heart of man
into which he more deeply thought than any
other prophet of Israel: his revelation of the
working of God in the soul of man, its Searcher,
its only Guide and Strength; his stress upon individual
responsibility and guilt, and on the one
glory of man being his knowledge of God and
the duty of every man to know God for himself
and not through others; and his song of the
beauty of the personal life rooted in faith, evergreen
and yielding its fruit even in seasons of
drought. Such passages increase in the Oracles
of Jeremiah. Not ceasing to be the patriot, the
civic conscience of his people, he busies himself
more with the hearts, the habits, the sins and the
duties towards God of its individuals. Like Christ
he takes the deaf apart from the multitude and
talks to him of himself.
</p>

<pb n='371'/><anchor id='Pg371'/>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>O Lord, Who triest the righteous,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Who seest the reins and the heart.<note place='foot'>xi.
20; xx. 12.</note></l>
</lg>
<lg>
<l>False above all is the heart,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Sick to despair,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Who is to know it?</l>
<l>I, the Lord, searching the heart</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And trying the reins,</l>
<l>To give to each man as his ways,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>As the fruit of his doings.<note place='foot'>xvii. 9
f.</note></l>
</lg>
<lg>
<l>Can any man hide him in secret</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And I not see him?<note place='foot'>xxiii. 24.</note></l>
</lg>
<p>
In those days they shall say no more: The
fathers have eaten sour grapes and the teeth
of the children are set on edge. But every
one shall die for his own iniquity, every man
that eateth sour grapes his teeth shall be set
on edge.<note place='foot'>xxxi. 29 f.</note>
</p>
<p>
Speak to all Judah all the words I have charged
thee.... Peradventure they will hearken
and turn <hi rend='italic'>every man from his evil way</hi>.<note place='foot'>xxvi.
2 f.</note>
</p>
<lg>
<l>He that would boast in this let him boast,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Insight and knowledge of Me.<note place='foot'>ix.
24.</note></l>
</lg>
<pb n='372'/><anchor id='Pg372'/>
<lg>
<l>Lord, I know&mdash;not to man is his way,</l>
<l>Not man's to walk or settle his steps.<note place='foot'>x. 23.</note></l>
</lg>
<lg>
<l>Blessed the man that trusts in the Lord</l>
<l>And the Lord is his trust!</l>
<l>He like a tree shall be planted by water,</l>
<l>That stretches its roots to the stream;</l>
<l>Unafraid at the coming of heat,</l>
<l>His leaf shall be green;</l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Sans</hi> care in the season of drought</l>
<l>He fails not in yielding his fruit.<note place='foot'>xvii. 7 f.; above, p.
<ref target="Pg054">54</ref>.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
The individual soul rooted in faith and drawing
life from the Fountain of Living Water,
independent of all disaster to the nation and
famine on earth&mdash;could not be more beautifully
drawn.
</p>

<p>
Now all this advance by Jeremiah from the idea
of the nation as the human unit in religion&mdash;Deuteronomy's
ideal and at first his own&mdash;to the
individual as the direct object of the Divine Grace
and Discipline was promoted, we have seen, by
the dire happenings of the time, the unworthy
conduct of the people, their abandonment by
God, the ruin of the State and of the national
worship&mdash;which cut off individuals from all political
and religious associations, leaving to each
(in Jeremiah's repeated phrase) only <hi rend='italic'>his life</hi>, or
<pb n='373'/><anchor id='Pg373'/>
<hi rend='italic'>his soul, for a prey</hi>.<note place='foot'>See above, pp.
<ref target="Pg227">227-229</ref>.</note> But all these could have
furthered the advance but little unless Jeremiah
had felt by bitter experience his own soul searched
and re-searched by God&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>But Thou, Lord, hast known me,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Thou seest and triest my heart towards
Thee&mdash;<note place='foot'>xii. 3.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
unless through doubt and struggle he himself
had won into the confidence of an immediate and
intimate knowledge of God. At his call he had
learned how a man could be God's before he was
his mother's or his nation's&mdash;God's own and to
the end answerable only to Him. He had proved
his solitary conscience under persecution. He
had known how personal convictions can overbear
the traditions of the past and the habits of
one's own generation&mdash;how God can hold a
single man alone to His Will against his nation
and all its powers, and vindicate him at last to
their faces. In all this lay much of the vicarious
service which Jeremiah achieved for his own
generation; what he had won for himself was
possible for each of them. And sure it is that
the personal piety which henceforth flourished
in Israel as it had never flourished before, weaving
its delicate tendrils about the ruins of the
state, the city and the altar, and (as the Psalms
show) blooming behind the shelter of the Law
<pb n='374'/><anchor id='Pg374'/>
like a garden of lilies within a fence of thorns,
sprang from seeds in Jeremiah's heart, and was
watered by his tears and the sweat of his spiritual
agonies.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='stars: 5'/>

<p>
We are now come to a confluence of the streams
we have been tracing&mdash;the prophecy of the New
Covenant. This occupies no incongruous place,
following hard as it does upon that of the eating
of sour grapes&mdash;individual inspiration upon individual
responsibility. But we cannot off-hand
accept it as Jeremiah's own; the critical questions
which have been with us from the beginning embarrass
us still.
</p>

<p>
The collection of Oracles to which that of the
New Covenant belongs, Chs. XXX, XXXI, was
not made till long after Jeremiah's time; it includes,
as we have seen, several of exilic or post-exilic
origin.<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target="Pg293">293</ref> ff. This
was rightly perceived by earlier critics
of last century, Movers, De Wette, Hitzig, etc., who mostly assigned
as a date the end of the exile and read the influence of
the Second Isaiah upon any Jeremian material that the chapters
may contain. In spite of objections by Graf their thesis was reaffirmed
and expanded by Stade (<hi rend='italic'>Gesch. Isr.</hi> i. 643) and by Smend
(<hi rend='italic'>Lehrbuch der A.T. Religionsgeschichte</hi>, 1893), who denied that
any part of xxx, xxxi was from Jeremiah, on grounds both of alleged
inconsistencies with Jeremiah's teaching, and of the representations
of Judah with her people restored and her cultivation resumed.
But since Smend criticism has been more discriminating;
admitting post-exilic elements and consequently a late age for
the whole collection but reserving for our Prophet various passages: Giesebrecht,
xxxi. 2-6, 15-20, 27-34; Duhm, xxx. 12-15, xxxi. 2-6, 15-22<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>;
Erbt, xxxi. 2-6, 15-17, 18-20; Cornill, xxxi. 2-5, 9<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>,
15-22<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>, 31-34; J. R. Gillies, xxxi. 2-6, 15-20, 29 f.,
31<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>, 33<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>, 34; Peake, xxxi. 2-6,
15-22, 31-34; Skinner, xxxi. 2-6,
15 f., 18-20, 21 f., 29 f., 31-34.</note> But so do other chapters of the
<pb n='375'/><anchor id='Pg375'/>
Book, in which nevertheless genuine prophecies
of Jeremiah are recognised by virtually all modern
critics. The context therefore offers no prejudice
against the authenticity of the prophecy of the
New Covenant, XXXI. 31-34. But the form and
the substance of this have raised doubts, so honest
and reluctant as to deserve our consideration.
Duhm starts his usual objection that the passage
is in prose and a style characteristic of the late
expanders of the Book. We may let that go, as
we have done before, as by itself inconclusive;<note place='foot'>Above, pp.
<ref target="Pg036">36</ref> f., <ref target="Pg040">40-42</ref>,
<ref target="Pg049">49-52</ref>, <ref target="Pg091">91</ref>.</note>
the prophecy may not have come directly from
Jeremiah's mouth but through the memory of a
reporter of the Prophet, Baruch or another. More
deserving of consideration is the criticism which
Duhm, with great unwillingness, makes of the
terms and substance of the prophecy. He objects
to the term <hi rend='italic'>covenant</hi>: a
<hi rend='italic'>covenant</hi> is a legal contract
and could hardly have been chosen for the
frame of his ideal by so pronounced an anti-legalist
as Jeremiah. The passage <q>promises a
new Covenant&mdash;not a new Torah but only a more
inward assimilation of the Torah by the people,
and emphasises the good results which this will
have for them but betrays no demand for a higher
<pb n='376'/><anchor id='Pg376'/>
kind of religion. If one does not let himself be
dazzled by the phrases <hi rend='italic'>new covenant</hi>
and <hi rend='italic'>write it on
the heart</hi> then the passage tells us of the relation
of the individual no more than Deuteronomy has
already regarded as possible, XXX. 11 ff., and desirable,
VI. 6-8: namely, that every man should be
at home in the Law and honestly follow it.</q> He
continues: <q>it is impossible for me to hold any
longer to the Jeremian origin of the passage. I
find in it only the effusion of one learned in the
Scriptures who regards as the highest ideal, that
every one of the Jewish people should know the
Law by heart.</q>
</p>

<p>
But in his resolve <q>not to let himself be dazzled</q>
has not Duhm gone to the opposite extreme and
seriously under-read the whole spirit of the
passage&mdash;besides showing as usual undue apprehensiveness
of the presence in the text of a
legalist at work?<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target="Pg040">40</ref>,
<ref target="Pg091">91</ref>, <ref target="Pg142">142</ref>,
<ref target="Pg145">145</ref>.</note> The choice of the term
<hi rend='italic'>covenant</hi> for the frame of his ideal was not unnatural
to Jeremiah nor irrelevant to his experience
and teaching. Formally the term may mean
a legal contract; but it is open to a prophet or a
poet to use any metaphor for his ideals and
transform its mere letter by the spirit he puts into
it; and after all <hi rend='italic'>covenant</hi> is only a metaphor for a
relation which was beyond the compass of any
figure to express. Yet it was a term classical in
<pb n='377'/><anchor id='Pg377'/>
Israel and most intelligible to the generation
whom Jeremiah was addressing. Its associations,
especially as he had recalled them,<note place='foot'>xi.
1 ff., etc.</note> had been those
not of the Law but of Love. It was not a contract
or bargain but an approach by God to His people,
an offer of His Grace, a statement of His Will and
accompanied by manifestations of His Power to
redeem them. One might as well charge Jesus
with legalism in adopting a term sanctioned by
God Himself, and so historical, sacred and endeared
to the national memory. Nor need Torah,
or Law, be taken as Duhm takes it in its sense of
the legal codes of Israel, but in its wider meaning
of the Divine <hi rend='italic'>instruction</hi> or
<hi rend='italic'>revelation</hi>. Further
the epithet <hi rend='italic'>New</hi> applied to Covenant was most
relevant to the Prophet's and his people's recent
sense of the failure of the ancient covenant, as restated
and enforced in Deuteronomy. In spite of
the excitement caused by the discovery of the Book
in which it was written, and the recital of its
words throughout the land, the Old Covenant had
failed to capture the heart of the people or to
secure from them more than the formal and superstitious
observance of the letter of its Torah.
Was it not a natural antithesis to predict that His
Torah would be set by God <hi rend='italic'>in their inward parts
and written on their hearts</hi>? How else (will Duhm
tell us?) than by such phrases could the Prophet
<pb n='378'/><anchor id='Pg378'/>
have described an inward and purely spiritual
process? To say as Duhm does that the phrases
only mean that common men would learn the
Law of God <q>by heart</q> (auswendig), is, whoever
their author may have been, to travesty his
meaning. Finally, all the phrasing of the New
Covenant is in harmony with the rest of the
Prophet's teaching. He had spoken of God's will
to give His people a new heart to know Him;<note place='foot'>xxiv. 7.</note>
he had taught religion as the individual's direct
knowledge of God;<note place='foot'>ix. 24; cp.
viii. 7<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>, etc.</note> he had won this himself from
God directly without help from his parentage, his
fellow-prophets or priests or any others; he had
most bitterly known also how weak the word of
one man is to teach his countrymen this
knowledge and that it can only come by the
inward operation of God Himself upon their
spirits; and he had made as clear as ever prophet
did that God's pardon for sin was the first, the
necessary preliminary to His other gifts. Nor is
the fact that the New Covenant is to be a national
one alien to his teaching: Jeremiah never lost
hope of his nation's survival and restoration.
</p>

<p>
Thus the passage on the New Covenant brings
together all the strands of Jeremiah's experience
and doctrine and hopes, shaken free from the
political debris of the times, into one fair web
under a pattern familiar and dear to the people.
<pb n='379'/><anchor id='Pg379'/>
The weaving, it is true, is none of the deftest,
but whether this is due to the aged Jeremiah's
failing fingers or to the awkwardness of a disciple,
the stuff and its dyes are all his own.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
Lo, days are coming&mdash;Rede of the Lord&mdash;when
I will make with the House of Israel
and with the House of Judah a New Covenant,
not like the Covenant which I made
with their fathers in the day that I took them
by their hand to bring them forth from the
land of Egypt, which My Covenant they
brake and I rejected them<note place='foot'>So Greek,
Latin and Syriac; Hebrew <hi rend='italic'>though I was an
husband to them</hi>.</note>&mdash;Rede of the
Lord. But this is My<note place='foot'>So one Greek version.</note> Covenant which I
will make with the sons<note place='foot'>So some MSS.</note> of Israel after
those days&mdash;Rede of the Lord&mdash;I will set
My Law in their inward part and on their
heart will I write it, and I will be to them
a God, and they shall be to Me a people.
And they shall teach no more every man
his neighbour and every man his brother
saying, Know thou<note place='foot'>So Greek and Latin.</note> the Lord! For they
shall all know Me from the least even to
the greatest;<note place='foot'>Hebrew adds,
<hi rend='italic'>Rede of the Lord</hi>.</note> for I will forgive their guilt
and their sin will I remember no more.
</quote>

<pb n='380'/><anchor id='Pg380'/>

<p>
This is, as has been said, a prophecy of
Christianity which has hardly its equal in the
Old Testament.<note place='foot'>Giesebrecht.</note> It is the Covenant which
Jesus Christ the Son of God accepted for Himself
and all men and sealed with His own blood.
</p>

<p>
And yet not even in this prophecy of Jeremiah,
in which the individual soul is made to feel that
God created it not for its family nor its state
nor its church but only for Himself, is there
any breath of a promise for it after death. The
Prophet's eyes are still sealed to that future.
The soul must be content that her strength and
peace and hope are with God.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='381'/><anchor id='Pg381'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<anchor id='Appendix_I'/>
<index index="toc" level1="Appendix I. Medes And Scythians."/>
<index index="pdf" level1="Appendix I."/>
<head type='sub'>Appendix I.</head>
<head>Medes And Scythians (pp. <ref target="Pg073">73</ref>,
<ref target="Pg110">110</ref>).</head>

<p>
It is very difficult, if not impossible, to give a
correct account of the national and racial movements
which, along with the moral conditions in
Judah, called forth Jeremiah's Oracles of judgment
in the years immediately following his call in
627-626 <hi rend='smallcaps'>B.C.</hi> But the following facts are well
founded. In or about 625 the Medes were defeated
in an attack upon Assyria and their king
Phraortes was killed, but at the same time Asshurbanipal
died, and his weaker successor was compelled
to recognize the virtual independence of
Nabopolassar, the Chaldean in Babylon. Cyaxares
(624-585), the son of Phraortes, soon after
his succession to his father&mdash;say between 624 and
620&mdash;led a second Median assault upon Assyria
and besieged Nineveh, but had to retire because
of the onset from the north of the Scythians, the
Ashguzai of the Assyrian monuments, probably
the Ashkenaz or Ashkunza (?) of the Old Testament.
And then it was not for some years that
Cyaxares felt himself strong enough by his
alliance with Nabopolassar for a third Median
invasion of Assyria which culminated in the
capture and destruction of Nineveh.
</p>

<p>
The Assyrians appear to have been in touch with
<pb n='382'/><anchor id='Pg382'/>
the Ashguzai for over a century and for a shorter
time probably in alliance with them; which
alliance was the cause of the Scythian advance
to the relief of Nineveh from its siege by the
Medes <hi rend='italic'>circa</hi> 724-720
(see Winckler <hi rend='italic'>Die Keilinschriften
v. das alte Testament</hi>, 3rd ed., pp. 100 ff.).
About the same time must be dated the Scythian
advance through Western Asia to the borders of
Egypt, which Herodotus (I. 103-104, IV. 1) reports.
Professor N. Schmidt (<hi rend='italic'>Enc. Bibl.</hi>, art.
<q>Scythians</q>) supposes that this advance was due
to the same Scythian-Assyrian alliance, in order
to preserve the Assyrian territories from the arms
of Psamtik of Egypt, who had since 639 been
besieging Ashdod; and he holds that this hypothesis
explains the absence of any record of
violence by the Scythians on their southern campaign,
except at Ashkelon. This precarious
hypothesis apart, we have the facts that no Biblical
chronicler records any invasion of Judah and
Benjamin by the Scythians, and yet that the
early Oracles of Jeremiah, generally attributed to
the alarms which the advance of such barbarian
hordes would excite in Judah, do closely fit the
Scythians (with a few exceptions that may be due
to the prophet's adaptation in 604 of his earlier
Oracles to the new <emph>enemy</emph> out of the north, the
Chaldeans).
</p>

<p>
There, are, however, modern writers who claim
that the Oracles in question were originally composed
not in view of the Scythian, but of the
Chaldean invasion of Palestine. So George
Douglas (<hi rend='italic'>The Book of Jeremiah</hi>, London, Hodder
&amp; Stoughton, 1903), who, while assigning Jeremiah's
call to 627, relegates the two visions and
<pb n='383'/><anchor id='Pg383'/>
all the Oracles in the first part of the book to the
years following Jehoiakim's accession to the
Jewish throne in 608; cp. Winckler, <hi rend='italic'>Geschichte
Israels</hi>, I. pp. 112 f. and F. Wilke (<hi rend='italic'>Alttestamentliche
studien R. Kittel zum 60 Geburtstag dargebracht</hi>, 1913),
quoted by John Skinner, <hi rend='italic'>Prophecy and Religion</hi>, pp.
42 f. n. 2. This would be an easy solution but
for the insuperable objections to it that the
Oracles in question far more closely fit the
Scythian, than the Chaldean, invasion; and that
Jer. I. 2, as distinctly covers prophecies of Jeremiah
in the days of Josiah as v. 3 does his
prophesying under Jehoiakim.
</p>

<p>
POSTSCRIPT.
</p>

<p>
The date of Nineveh's fall has hitherto been accepted
as 607-606 <hi rend='smallcaps'>B.C.</hi> But in July of this year
(1923) Mr. C. J. Gadd described to the British
Academy a Babylonian tablet, which dates the
fall in the fourteenth year of Nabopolassar's reign
in Babylon. This year was 612 <hi rend='smallcaps'>B.C.</hi>, if it be right
to reckon the reign from 626-25 <hi rend='smallcaps'>B.C.</hi>; but as remarked
above, p. <ref target="Pg175">175</ref>, Nabopolassar became in
that year officially not king but only viceroy.
Dependent as I was on a newspaper summary of
Mr. Gadd's lecture I could therefore do no more
than offer for the fall of Nineveh the alternative
dates, 612 and 606; see above p. <ref target="Pg175">175</ref> and compare
p. <ref target="Pg162">162</ref>.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='384'/><anchor id='Pg384'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<anchor id="Appendix_II"/>
<index index='toc' level1="Appendix II. Necoh's Campaign."/>
<index index='pdf' level1='Appendix II.'/>
<head type='sub'>Appendix II.</head>
<head>Necoh's Campaign (pp. <ref target="Pg162">162</ref>,
<ref target="Pg163">163</ref>).</head>

<p>
In addition to the accounts in the Books of Kings
and Chronicles of Pharaoh Nĕcoh's advance into
Asia in pursuance of his claim for a share of the
crumbling Assyrian Empire there are two independent
records: (1) Jeremiah XLVII. 1&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>and
Pharaoh smote Gaza</hi>&mdash;a headline (with other particulars)
wrongly prefixed by the Hebrew text, but
not by the Greek, to an Oracle upon an invasion
of Philistia not from the south but from the north
(see above, pp. <ref target="Pg013">13</ref>,
<ref target="Pg061">61</ref>); (2) by Herodotus, II. 159,
who says that <q>Nĕcoh (Nekôs) making war by
land on the Syrians defeated them at Magdolos
and after the battle took Kadŭtis, a great city of
Syria.</q> Magdolos is probably Megiddo, unless it
stands for Megdel, which, as well as Rumman
(= Hadad-rimmon, the scene of the mourning for
Josiah, Zech. XII. 11) lies near Megiddo. If, as
is usually held, Kadŭtis be Gaza, Herodotus has
reversed the proper order of Nĕcoh's two actions;
but Kadŭtis also suggests <hi rend='italic'>hak-Kôdēsh</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>the holy</hi>, an
epithet of Jerusalem (<hi rend='italic'>Jerusalem</hi>, I. 270) which
would suit Herodotus' order, for it was after
Megiddo that Nĕcoh became master of Jerusalem
and Judah. The suggestion, though worth
mentioning, is doubtful; the epithet is late, exilic
and post-exilic; and Herodotus' phrase <hi rend='italic'>took
Kadŭtis</hi> is hardly equivalent to <hi rend='italic'>became paramount</hi>
there as Nĕcoh became paramount in Jerusalem.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='385'/><anchor id='Pg385'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Index Of Texts.</head>

<lg>
<l>Genesis&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xlix. 27; <ref target="Pg069">69</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Exodus&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xxi. 1-6; <ref target="Pg235">235</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leviticus&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>vi. 5; <ref target="Pg152">152</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xix. 27; <ref target="Pg206">206</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xxvi. 34 f.; <ref target="Pg008">8</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Numbers&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xxx. 2, 12; <ref target="Pg313">313</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Deuteronomy&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>iv. 19; <ref target="Pg136">136</ref>, <ref target="Pg195">195</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xvii. 3; <ref target="Pg195">195</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xviii. 6; <ref target="Pg135">135</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xxxii. 13; <ref target="Pg222">222</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Judges&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>i. 16; <ref target="Pg193">193</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>iv. 17; <ref target="Pg194">194</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>v. 4; <ref target="Pg222">222</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>24; <ref target="Pg194">194</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xi. 36; <ref target="Pg313">313</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>I. Samuel&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>x. 2; <ref target="Pg302">302</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xv. 6; <ref target="Pg193">193</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>22; <ref target="Pg156">156</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>I. Kings&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ii. 26 f.; <ref target="Pg067">67</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>II. Kings&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>x. 15, 23; <ref target="Pg193">193</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xxii. 12 ff.; <ref target="Pg174">174</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>20; <ref target="Pg259">259</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xxiii. 5, 13; <ref target="Pg195">195</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>8 ff.; <ref target="Pg135">135</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>10; <ref target="Pg196">196</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>28-30; <ref target="Pg163">163</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>31; <ref target="Pg066">66</ref>, <ref target="Pg232">232</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xxiv. 1-16; <ref target="Pg176">176</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>6; <ref target="Pg259">259</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>8, 15; <ref target="Pg213">213</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>17; <ref target="Pg232">232</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>18; <ref target="Pg066">66</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xxv. 7; <ref target="Pg270">270</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>18; <ref target="Pg246">246</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>21; <ref target="Pg236">236</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>I. Chronicles&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ii. 55; <ref target="Pg193">193</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>II. Chronicles&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xxxv. 20; <ref target="Pg162">162</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xxxvi. 21-23; <ref target="Pg008">8</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ezra&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>i. 1 f.; <ref target="Pg008">8</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nehemiah&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xiii; <ref target="Pg020">20</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>15-22; <ref target="Pg221">221</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Psalms&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>v. 9; <ref target="Pg122">122</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xv; <ref target="Pg232">232</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xxiii; <ref target="Pg009">9</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xxvi-xxviii; <ref target="Pg009">9</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>l. 13, 14; <ref target="Pg158">158</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>li. 16, 17; <ref target="Pg158">158</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Isaiah&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>vi; <ref target="Pg351">351</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>x. 28-32; <ref target="Pg070">70</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xv. f.; <ref target="Pg020">20</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xl. ff.; <ref target="Pg008">8</ref>, <ref target="Pg020">20</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xliv. 28; <ref target="Pg008">8</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>lii, liii; <ref target="Pg007">7</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>lvi. 2-7; <ref target="Pg221">221</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>lviii; <ref target="Pg020">20</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>13 f.; <ref target="Pg221">221</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>lx. 5; <ref target="Pg302">302</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jeremiah&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>i.; <ref target="Pg009">9</ref>, <ref target="Pg028">28</ref>, <ref target="Pg030">30</ref>, <ref target="Pg042">42</ref>, <ref target="Pg050">50</ref>, <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg078">78-88</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>1-3; <ref target="Pg009">9</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>5; <ref target="Pg067">67</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>6; <ref target="Pg082">82</ref>, <ref target="Pg318">318</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>9 f.; <ref target="Pg355">355</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>10; <ref target="Pg014">14</ref>, <ref target="Pg083">83</ref>, <ref target="Pg319">319</ref></l>
<pb n='386'/><anchor id='Pg386'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>11 f.; <ref target="Pg351">351</ref>, <ref target="Pg365">365</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>12 f.; <ref target="Pg355">355</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>13-15; <ref target="Pg062">62</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>17 f.; <ref target="Pg014">14</ref>, <ref target="Pg333">333</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ii, iii; <ref target="Pg355">355</ref>, <ref target="Pg357">357</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ii-xxv; <ref target="Pg010">10</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ii. 1-37; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg091">91-98</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>1-3; <ref target="Pg044">44</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>2; <ref target="Pg104">104</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>5; <ref target="Pg106">106</ref>, <ref target="Pg356">356</ref>, <ref target="Pg362">362</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>5-8; <ref target="Pg049">49</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>8; <ref target="Pg355">355</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>9; <ref target="Pg356">356</ref> f.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>11-13; <ref target="Pg346">346</ref>, <ref target="Pg356">356</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>13; <ref target="Pg364">364</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>14 f.; <ref target="Pg039">39</ref>, <ref target="Pg040">40</ref>, <ref target="Pg362">362</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>14-17; <ref target="Pg047">47</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>17; <ref target="Pg014">14</ref>, <ref target="Pg105">105</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>18; <ref target="Pg081">81</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>19; <ref target="Pg012">12</ref>, <ref target="Pg014">14</ref>, <ref target="Pg360">360</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>21 f.; <ref target="Pg107">107</ref>, <ref target="Pg346">346</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>23 f.; <ref target="Pg068">68</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>25; <ref target="Pg346">346</ref>, <ref target="Pg360">360</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>26; <ref target="Pg018">18</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>28; <ref target="Pg076">76</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>29; <ref target="Pg012">12</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>30; <ref target="Pg360">360</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>31; <ref target="Pg047">47</ref>, <ref target="Pg106">106</ref>, <ref target="Pg346">346</ref>, <ref target="Pg355">355</ref>, <ref target="Pg362">362</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>32 ff.; <ref target="Pg045">45</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>35; <ref target="Pg346">346</ref>, <ref target="Pg357">357</ref>, <ref target="Pg363">363</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>37; <ref target="Pg358">358</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>iii; <ref target="Pg018">18</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>1-25; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg098">98-103</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>1-6; <ref target="Pg052">52</ref>, <ref target="Pg358">358</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>2; <ref target="Pg077">77</ref>, <ref target="Pg370">370</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>3; <ref target="Pg358">358</ref>, <ref target="Pg365">365</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>5; <ref target="Pg040">40</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>6-18; <ref target="Pg018">18</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>6 ff.; <ref target="Pg358">358</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>20; <ref target="Pg358">358</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>21-25; <ref target="Pg361">361</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>22; <ref target="Pg107">107</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>25; <ref target="Pg107">107</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>iv. 1-4; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg103">103</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>3 f.; <ref target="Pg043">43</ref>, <ref target="Pg070">70</ref>, <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg108">108</ref></hi>, <ref target="Pg346">346</ref>, <ref target="Pg361">361</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>5-8; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg112">112</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>6; <ref target="Pg355">355</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>8; <ref target="Pg358">358</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>9 f.; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg113">113</ref></hi>, <ref target="Pg332">332</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>11-22; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg114">114</ref></hi>, <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg115">115</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>11-14; <ref target="Pg060">60</ref>, <ref target="Pg068">68</ref>, <ref target="Pg069">69</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>15-18; <ref target="Pg060">60</ref>, <ref target="Pg072">72</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>18; <ref target="Pg360">360</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>23-28; <ref target="Pg061">61</ref>, <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg116">116</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>28; <ref target="Pg358">358</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>29-31; <ref target="Pg045">45</ref> f., <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg117">117</ref></hi>, <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg118">118</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>v. 1-9; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg119">119</ref></hi>, <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg120">120</ref></hi>, <ref target="Pg134">134</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>1-6; <ref target="Pg048">48</ref>, <ref target="Pg357">357</ref>, <ref target="Pg369">369</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>1; <ref target="Pg370">370</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>3; <ref target="Pg360">360</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>4; <ref target="Pg012">12</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>6; <ref target="Pg069">69</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>7-9; <ref target="Pg357">357</ref>, <ref target="Pg358">358</ref>, <ref target="Pg369">369</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>10-14; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg120">120</ref></hi>, <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg121">121</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>13; <ref target="Pg018">18</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>14; <ref target="Pg084">84</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>15-17; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg122">122</ref></hi>, <ref target="Pg355">355</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>18 f.; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg122">122</ref></hi>, <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg123">123</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>20-31; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg123">123-125</ref></hi>, <ref target="Pg357">357</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>22; <ref target="Pg365">365</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>24; <ref target="Pg365">365</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>26; <ref target="Pg370">370</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>29; <ref target="Pg358">358</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>31; <ref target="Pg343">343</ref>, <ref target="Pg346">346</ref>, <ref target="Pg360">360</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>vi. 1-8; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg125">125-127</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>9-15; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg127">127-129</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>11; <ref target="Pg319">319</ref>, <ref target="Pg330">330</ref>, <ref target="Pg358">358</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>13-15; <ref target="Pg200">200</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>15; <ref target="Pg359">359</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>16-21; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg129">129</ref></hi>, <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg130">130</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>22-26; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg130">130</ref></hi>, <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg131">131</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>26; <ref target="Pg359">359</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>27-29; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg132">132-134</ref></hi>, <ref target="Pg352">352</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>27-30; <ref target="Pg360">360</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>vii-x; <ref target="Pg017">17</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>vii. 1-15; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg147">147-151</ref></hi>, <ref target="Pg346">346</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>1-28; <ref target="Pg018">18</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>3 ff.; <ref target="Pg346">346</ref>, <ref target="Pg357">357</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>12-15; <ref target="Pg072">72</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>14; <ref target="Pg367">367</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>15; <ref target="Pg359">359</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>16-20; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg195">195</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>16; <ref target="Pg358">358</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>19; <ref target="Pg360">360</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>21-23; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg155">155-159</ref></hi>, <ref target="Pg346">346</ref>, <ref target="Pg367">367</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>28 ff.; <ref target="Pg050">50</ref></l>
<pb n='387'/><anchor id='Pg387'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>30 ff.; <ref target="Pg165">165</ref>, <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg195">195</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>viii.; <ref target="Pg050">50</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>1-3; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg196">196</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>4-12; <ref target="Pg196">196</ref>, <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg198">198-200</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>5; <ref target="Pg013">13</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>7; <ref target="Pg069">69</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>8 f.; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg153">153</ref></hi>, <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg154">154</ref></hi>, <ref target="Pg155">155</ref>, <ref target="Pg369">369</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>10-12; <ref target="Pg013">13</ref>, <ref target="Pg261">261</ref>, <ref target="Pg359">359</ref>, <ref target="Pg360">360</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>13; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg200">200</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>14-ix. 1; <ref target="Pg063">63</ref> f., <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg200">200-202</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>16; <ref target="Pg012">12</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>19; <ref target="Pg356">356</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>21; <ref target="Pg012">12</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>22; <ref target="Pg069">69</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ix.; <ref target="Pg050">50</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>1; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg202">202</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>2-9; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg202">202-204</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>2 f.; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg341">341</ref></hi>, <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg342">342</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>3, 7; <ref target="Pg230">230</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>4 f.; <ref target="Pg369">369</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>9; <ref target="Pg358">358</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>10-12; <ref target="Pg204">204</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>11; <ref target="Pg359">359</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>13-16; <ref target="Pg204">204</ref>, <ref target="Pg208">208</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>15; <ref target="Pg359">359</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>17 ff.; <ref target="Pg058">58</ref>, <ref target="Pg205">205</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>20-22; <ref target="Pg058">58</ref>, <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg205">205</ref></hi>, <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg206">206</ref></hi>, <ref target="Pg241">241</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>22 f.; <ref target="Pg049">49</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>23-26; <ref target="Pg018">18</ref>, <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg206">206</ref></hi>, <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg207">207</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>24; <ref target="Pg357">357</ref>, <ref target="Pg371">371</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>x. 1-16; <ref target="Pg018">18</ref>, <ref target="Pg020">20</ref>, <ref target="Pg207">207</ref>, <ref target="Pg352">352</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>6-8; <ref target="Pg013">13</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>11; <ref target="Pg018">18</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>17 f.; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg207">207</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>19-22; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg207">207-209</ref></hi>, <ref target="Pg241">241</ref>, <ref target="Pg370">370</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>23 f.; <ref target="Pg049">49</ref>, <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg209">209</ref></hi>, <ref target="Pg372">372</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>25; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg209">209</ref></hi>, <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg210">210</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xi.; <ref target="Pg030">30</ref>, <ref target="Pg042">42</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>1-5; <ref target="Pg018">18</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>1-8; <ref target="Pg028">28</ref>, <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg143">143-145</ref></hi>, <ref target="Pg155">155</ref>, <ref target="Pg377">377</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>6-8; <ref target="Pg013">13</ref>, <ref target="Pg017">17</ref>, <ref target="Pg018">18</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>13; <ref target="Pg076">76</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>14; <ref target="Pg358">358</ref>, <ref target="Pg360">360</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>15, 16; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg151">151-153</ref></hi>, <ref target="Pg210">210</ref>, <ref target="Pg346">346</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>18 ff.; <ref target="Pg028">28</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>18-23; <hi rend='bold'>323</hi> f.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>20; <ref target="Pg330">330</ref>, <ref target="Pg371">371</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>21; <ref target="Pg146">146</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>22 f.; <ref target="Pg329">329</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xii. 1-6, 28; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg339">339</ref></hi>, <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg340">340</ref></hi>, <ref target="Pg351">351</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>1-2; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg160">160</ref></hi>, <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg161">161</ref></hi>, <ref target="Pg356">356</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>3; <ref target="Pg014">14</ref>, <ref target="Pg329">329</ref>, <ref target="Pg373">373</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>5; <ref target="Pg332">332</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>7-9; <ref target="Pg362">362</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>7-13; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg210">210-212</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>8; <ref target="Pg385">385</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>9; <ref target="Pg230">230</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>11; <ref target="Pg230">230</ref>, <ref target="Pg362">362</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xiii. 1-17; <ref target="Pg028">28</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>1-11; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg183">183-185</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>1; <ref target="Pg356">356</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>12-14; <ref target="Pg055">55</ref>, <ref target="Pg185">185</ref>, <ref target="Pg358">358</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>15, 16; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg059">59</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>17; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg212">212</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>18, 19; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg213">213</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>20-27; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg213">213-215</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>22; <ref target="Pg360">360</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>23; <ref target="Pg108">108</ref>, <ref target="Pg346">346</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>24; <ref target="Pg359">359</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>25; <ref target="Pg361">361</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xiv; <ref target="Pg050">50</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>1 ff.; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg056">56</ref> f.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>8 f.; <ref target="Pg057">57</ref>, <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg348">348</ref></hi>, <ref target="Pg364">364</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>11-16; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg050">50</ref> f.</hi>, <ref target="Pg360">360</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>12; <ref target="Pg346">346</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>17-18; <ref target="Pg051">51</ref>, <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg215">215</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>19-22; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg216">216</ref></hi>, <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg217">217</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>21; <ref target="Pg348">348</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>22; <ref target="Pg356">356</ref>, <ref target="Pg365">365</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xv. 1-9; <ref target="Pg052">52</ref>, <ref target="Pg358">358</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>1-4; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg217">217</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>5-9; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg217">217</ref></hi>, <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg218">218</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>7 f.; <ref target="Pg359">359</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>10; <ref target="Pg319">319</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>10-21; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg324">324-326</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>13, 14; <ref target="Pg013">13</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>15; <ref target="Pg330">330</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>18 f.; <ref target="Pg332">332</ref>, <ref target="Pg347">347</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xvi. 2-9; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg326">326</ref></hi>, <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg327">327</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>5-9; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg219">219</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>10-13; <ref target="Pg219">219</ref>, <ref target="Pg327">327</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>12; <ref target="Pg346">346</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>14, 15; <ref target="Pg018">18</ref>, <ref target="Pg219">219</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>16-18; <ref target="Pg219">219</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>19, 20; <ref target="Pg220">220</ref>, <ref target="Pg356">356</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xvii. 1-4; <ref target="Pg013">13</ref>, <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg220">220</ref></hi>, <ref target="Pg346">346</ref></l>
<pb n='388'/><anchor id='Pg388'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>5 ff.; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg053">53</ref> f.</hi>, <ref target="Pg353">353</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>7 f.; <ref target="Pg372">372</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>9, 10; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg108">108</ref></hi>, <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg109">109</ref></hi>, <ref target="Pg371">371</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>13; <ref target="Pg364">364</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>14-18; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg328">328</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>16; <ref target="Pg237">237</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>18; <ref target="Pg329">329</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>19-27; <ref target="Pg020">20</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xviii; <ref target="Pg082">82</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xviii. 1-12; <ref target="Pg028">28</ref>, <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg185">185-190</ref></hi>, <ref target="Pg355">355</ref>, <ref target="Pg360">360</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>1; <ref target="Pg356">356</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>7-10; <ref target="Pg084">84</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>13-17; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg221">221</ref></hi>, <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg222">222</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>11 f.; <ref target="Pg361">361</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>15; <ref target="Pg356">356</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>17; <ref target="Pg359">359</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>18-23; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg328">328</ref> f.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>20 f.; <ref target="Pg332">332</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xix; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg191">191</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xix-xx. 6; <ref target="Pg223">223</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>1; <ref target="Pg356">356</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xx. 1-6; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg191">191</ref></hi>, <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg192">192</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>2; <ref target="Pg321">321</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>3 f.; <ref target="Pg369">369</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>7; <ref target="Pg082">82</ref>, <ref target="Pg318">318</ref>, <ref target="Pg353">353</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>7-18; <ref target="Pg223">223</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>7-12; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg330">330</ref></hi>, <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg331">331</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>8; <ref target="Pg318">318</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>9; <ref target="Pg319">319</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>11; <ref target="Pg353">353</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>12; <ref target="Pg371">371</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>14-18; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg331">331</ref></hi>, <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg332">332</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xxi. 1-10; <ref target="Pg223">223</ref>, <ref target="Pg267">267</ref>, <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg268">268</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>7; <ref target="Pg358">358</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>9; <ref target="Pg229">229</ref>, <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg277">277-280</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>11, 12; <ref target="Pg223">223</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>13, 14; <ref target="Pg223">223</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xxii-xxiii. 8; <ref target="Pg016">16</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xxii. 1-5; <ref target="Pg223">223</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>6 f.; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg223">223</ref></hi>, <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg224">224</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>8 f.; <ref target="Pg224">224</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>10; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg164">164</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>11 f.; <ref target="Pg223">223</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>13-17; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg166">166</ref></hi>, <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg167">167</ref></hi>, <ref target="Pg223">223</ref>, <ref target="Pg369">369</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>15 f.; <ref target="Pg075">75</ref>, <ref target="Pg357">357</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>18 f.; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg167">167</ref></hi>, <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg168">168</ref></hi>, <ref target="Pg259">259</ref>, <ref target="Pg321">321</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>20-30; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg224">224-226</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>25 f.; <ref target="Pg355">355</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>26; <ref target="Pg213">213</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xxiii. 1-8; <ref target="Pg020">20</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>7, 8; <ref target="Pg018">18</ref>, <ref target="Pg219">219</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>9-32; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg253">253-258</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>9-40; <ref target="Pg016">16</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>14, 17, 22; <ref target="Pg261">261</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>14-17; <ref target="Pg361">361</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>15; <ref target="Pg359">359</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>19, 20; <ref target="Pg018">18</ref>, <ref target="Pg358">358</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>21; <ref target="Pg265">265</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>23 f.; <ref target="Pg366">366</ref>, <ref target="Pg371">371</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>27; <ref target="Pg260">260</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>28; <ref target="Pg264">264</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>31; <ref target="Pg265">265</ref>, <ref target="Pg370">370</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>32; <ref target="Pg259">259</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xxiv; <ref target="Pg028">28</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>1; <ref target="Pg356">356</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>1-9; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg238">238-241</ref></hi>, <ref target="Pg309">309</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>7; <ref target="Pg378">378</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>8 ff.; <ref target="Pg355">355</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>9 f.; <ref target="Pg359">359</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xxv; <ref target="Pg022">22</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>1-11, 13; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg179">179-181</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>9; <ref target="Pg355">355</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>12-14; <ref target="Pg020">20</ref>, <ref target="Pg181">181</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>13-15; <ref target="Pg014">14</ref>, <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg181">181</ref></hi>, <ref target="Pg358">358</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>15-38; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg182">182</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>26; <ref target="Pg020">20</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xxvi; <ref target="Pg010">10</ref>, <ref target="Pg147">147</ref>, <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg168">168-174</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>1-9; <ref target="Pg018">18</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>2; <ref target="Pg165">165</ref>, <ref target="Pg371">371</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>6; <ref target="Pg072">72</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>13; <ref target="Pg357">357</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>14, 15; <ref target="Pg264">264</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xxvii-xxxv; <ref target="Pg010">10</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xxvii, xxviii; <ref target="Pg247">247</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xxvii; <ref target="Pg234">234</ref>, <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg248">248-250</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>1; <ref target="Pg013">13</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>2; <ref target="Pg356">356</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>5, 6; <ref target="Pg355">355</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>7; <ref target="Pg013">13</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>9; <ref target="Pg361">361</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>12-14; <ref target="Pg013">13</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>17-22; <ref target="Pg013">13</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>18; <ref target="Pg264">264</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xxviii; <ref target="Pg010">10</ref>, <ref target="Pg028">28</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>2-17; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg251">251-253</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>6; <ref target="Pg264">264</ref></l>
<pb n='389'/><anchor id='Pg389'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xxviii. 11; <ref target="Pg264">264</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>15; <ref target="Pg361">361</ref>, <ref target="Pg369">369</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>17; <ref target="Pg322">322</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xxix; <ref target="Pg040">40</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>1-23; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg241">241-245</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>4-13; <ref target="Pg367">367</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>14; <ref target="Pg013">13</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>15; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg245">245</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>16-20; <ref target="Pg013">13</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>21-23; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg245">245</ref></hi>, <ref target="Pg261">261</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>24-32; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg246">246-247</ref></hi>, <ref target="Pg322">322</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>29; <ref target="Pg237">237</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xxx-xxxiii; <ref target="Pg286">286</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xxx, xxxi; <ref target="Pg293">293</ref>, <ref target="Pg374">374</ref> f.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xxx. 2; <ref target="Pg293">293</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>5-9; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg294">294</ref>, <ref target="Pg295">295</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>10, 11; <ref target="Pg013">13</ref>, <ref target="Pg295">295</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>12-15; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg295">295</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>15; <ref target="Pg013">13</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>16-17; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg296">296</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>22; <ref target="Pg013">13</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>23, 24; <ref target="Pg018">18</ref>, <ref target="Pg358">358</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xxxi; <ref target="Pg030">30</ref>, <ref target="Pg042">42</ref>, <ref target="Pg286">286</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>1-6; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg297">297-300</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>6; <ref target="Pg141">141</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>7-14; <ref target="Pg020">20</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>7-9; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg300">300</ref>, <ref target="Pg301">301</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>10-14; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg301">301</ref>, <ref target="Pg302">302</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>15; <ref target="Pg047">47</ref>, <ref target="Pg070">70</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>15-17; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg303">303</ref>, <ref target="Pg304">304</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>18-22; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg304">304</ref>, <ref target="Pg305">305</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>20; <ref target="Pg363">363</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>23-28; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg305">305</ref>, <ref target="Pg306">306</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>29, 30; <ref target="Pg307">307</ref>, <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg371">371</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>31-34; <ref target="Pg307">307</ref>, <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg375">375-380</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>35 f.; <ref target="Pg365">365</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xxxii; <ref target="Pg010">10</ref>, <ref target="Pg028">28</ref>, <ref target="Pg286">286</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>1-5; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg286">286</ref></hi>, <ref target="Pg355">355</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>6-15; <ref target="Pg285">285</ref>, <ref target="Pg356">356</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>6-25; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg287">287-289</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>12; <ref target="Pg012">12</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>16-25; <ref target="Pg237">237</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>26-44; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg289">289</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>30; <ref target="Pg356">356</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xxxiii; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg289">289-291</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>1; <ref target="Pg290">290</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>4-13; <ref target="Pg290">290</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>14-26; <ref target="Pg013">13</ref>, <ref target="Pg289">289</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xxxiv. 1-7; <ref target="Pg267">267</ref>, <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg268">268-270</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>2; <ref target="Pg355">355</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>8-22; <ref target="Pg235">235</ref>, <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg273">273-275</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>22; <ref target="Pg355">355</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xxxv; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg193">193</ref>, <ref target="Pg194">194</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>2; <ref target="Pg356">356</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xxxvi-xlv; <ref target="Pg010">10</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xxxvi; <ref target="Pg017">17</ref>, <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg022">22</ref> ff.</hi>, <ref target="Pg026">26</ref>, <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg178">178</ref>, <ref target="Pg179">179</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>2; <ref target="Pg082">82</ref>, <ref target="Pg356">356</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>9; <ref target="Pg165">165</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>28; <ref target="Pg356">356</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>32; <ref target="Pg089">89</ref>, <ref target="Pg110">110</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xxxvii. 3-10; <ref target="Pg267">267</ref>, <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg270">270</ref>, <ref target="Pg271">271</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>5, 7; <ref target="Pg234">234</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>11; <ref target="Pg234">234</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>11-21; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg275">275</ref>, <ref target="Pg276">276</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>17-21; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg284">284</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xxxviii. 1-3; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg276">276-280</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>2; <ref target="Pg229">229</ref>, <ref target="Pg277">277</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>4-6; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg280">280</ref>, <ref target="Pg281">281</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>7-13; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg281">281</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>14-28; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg282">282-285</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>19 ff.; <ref target="Pg321">321</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>22; <ref target="Pg369">369</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>28; <ref target="Pg285">285</ref>, <ref target="Pg291">291</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xxxix. 3, 14; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg291">291</ref></hi>, <ref target="Pg292">292</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>4-13; <ref target="Pg013">13</ref>, <ref target="Pg291">291</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>7; <ref target="Pg270">270</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>14; <ref target="Pg174">174</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>15-18; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg281">281</ref>, <ref target="Pg282">282</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>18; <ref target="Pg229">229</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xl-xliv; <ref target="Pg017">17</ref>, <ref target="Pg018">18</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xl. 1-6; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg291">291</ref>, <ref target="Pg292">292</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>5, 6; <ref target="Pg174">174</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xli, xlii; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg307">307-309</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xliii. 1-7; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg310">310</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>8-13; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg310">310</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xliv. 1-14; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg311">311</ref>, <ref target="Pg312">312</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>15-28; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg312">312-316</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>30; <ref target="Pg234">234</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xlv; <ref target="Pg017">17</ref>, <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg226">226-229</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>5; <ref target="Pg027">27</ref>, <ref target="Pg322">322</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xlvi-li; <ref target="Pg010">10</ref>, <ref target="Pg014">14</ref>, <ref target="Pg020">20</ref>, <ref target="Pg181">181</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xlvi. 26; <ref target="Pg013">13</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>27 f.; <ref target="Pg013">13</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xlvii. 1; <ref target="Pg013">13</ref>, <ref target="Pg384">384</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>2, 3; <hi rend='bold'><ref target="Pg061">61</ref></hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xlviii. 40-47; <ref target="Pg013">13</ref>, <ref target="Pg020">20</ref></l>
<pb n='390'/><anchor id='Pg390'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xlix. 7-22; <ref target="Pg020">20</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>34-39; <ref target="Pg020">20</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>l. 1-58; <ref target="Pg020">20</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>li. 59; <ref target="Pg234">234</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>60; <ref target="Pg020">20</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>lii; <ref target="Pg010">10</ref>, <ref target="Pg020">20</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>28-30; <ref target="Pg013">13</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lamentations; <ref target="Pg031">31</ref>, <ref target="Pg318">318</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ezekiel&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>i; <ref target="Pg351">351</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>viii; <ref target="Pg234">234</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xi. 15; <ref target="Pg234">234</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xvi. 59; <ref target="Pg232">232</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xvii. 11-21; <ref target="Pg232">232</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xix. 14; <ref target="Pg233">233</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xxiii. 22; <ref target="Pg213">213</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xxix. 3; <ref target="Pg234">234</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Daniel; <ref target="Pg292">292</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hosea&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>vi. 1-4; <ref target="Pg217">217</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Joel&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ii. 1; <ref target="Pg112">112</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amos&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>iii. 2; <ref target="Pg260">260</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>6; <ref target="Pg112">112</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>v. 25; <ref target="Pg158">158</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ix. 2 ff.; <ref target="Pg366">366</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Obadiah; <ref target="Pg020">20</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Micah&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>vi. 6-8; <ref target="Pg075">75</ref>, <ref target="Pg158">158</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zephaniah&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>iii. 4; <ref target="Pg258">258</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Habakkuk&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>iii. 7; <ref target="Pg072">72</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Matthew&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xviii. 23 f.; <ref target="Pg189">189</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xxvii. 7; <ref target="Pg185">185</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Luke&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>i. 76; <ref target="Pg079">79</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>vii. 39 ff.; <ref target="Pg189">189</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xiii. 6 ff.; <ref target="Pg189">189</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>xix; <ref target="Pg189">189</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>1 Corinthians&mdash;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>i. 17; <ref target="Pg157">157</ref></l>
</lg>

</div>

<pb n='391'/><anchor id='Pg391'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head>Index Of Names And Subjects.</head>

<lg>
<l>Ahikam, <ref target="Pg157">157</ref>, <ref target="Pg174">174</ref>, <ref target="Pg291">291</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amos, <ref target="Pg003">3</ref>, <ref target="Pg022">22</ref>, <ref target="Pg112">112</ref>, <ref target="Pg158">158</ref>, <ref target="Pg260">260</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anathoth, <ref target="Pg066">66</ref>, <ref target="Pg067">67</ref>, <ref target="Pg287">287</ref>, etc.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apocrypha, the, <ref target="Pg008">8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Arabian Nights,</q> <ref target="Pg036">36</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ark, the, <ref target="Pg101">101</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Assyria, <ref target="Pg066">66</ref>, <ref target="Pg077">77</ref>, <ref target="Pg175">175</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Atonement, <ref target="Pg007">7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baalîm, <ref target="Pg076">76</ref>, etc.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Babylonian idolatry, <ref target="Pg234">234</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ball, C. J., his <q>The Prophecies of Jeremiah,</q> <ref target="Pg009">9</ref>, <ref target="Pg093">93</ref>, <ref target="Pg184">184</ref>, <ref target="Pg203">203</ref>, <ref target="Pg210">210</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baruch, <ref target="Pg004">4</ref>, <ref target="Pg008">8</ref>, <ref target="Pg023">23</ref>, <ref target="Pg026">26</ref>, <ref target="Pg082">82</ref>, <ref target="Pg178">178</ref>, <ref target="Pg227">227</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Budde, Professor, <ref target="Pg038">38</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calvin, <ref target="Pg278">278</ref>, <ref target="Pg283">283</ref>, <ref target="Pg315">315</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carchemish, battle of, <ref target="Pg175">175</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chaldeans, the, <ref target="Pg110">110</ref>, <ref target="Pg121">121</ref>, <ref target="Pg122">122</ref>, etc.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cornill, <ref target="Pg007">7</ref>, <ref target="Pg038">38</ref>, <ref target="Pg082">82</ref>, <ref target="Pg166">166</ref>, <ref target="Pg184">184</ref>, <ref target="Pg190">190</ref>, <ref target="Pg222">222</ref>, <ref target="Pg268">268</ref>, <ref target="Pg269">269</ref>, <ref target="Pg276">276</ref>, <ref target="Pg287">287</ref>, <ref target="Pg298">298</ref>, <ref target="Pg299">299</ref>, <ref target="Pg301">301</ref>, <ref target="Pg312">312</ref>, <ref target="Pg329">329</ref>, <ref target="Pg375">375</ref>, etc.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Corvée, the, <ref target="Pg166">166</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Covenant, the new, <ref target="Pg374">374</ref> ff.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dalman: <q>Palästinischer Diwan,</q> <ref target="Pg036">36</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Davidson, Dr. A. B., <ref target="Pg003">3</ref>, <ref target="Pg005">5</ref>, <ref target="Pg015">15</ref>, <ref target="Pg026">26</ref>, <ref target="Pg139">139</ref>, <ref target="Pg186">186</ref>, <ref target="Pg268">268</ref>, <ref target="Pg354">354</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Deuteronomy, Book of, <ref target="Pg135">135</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its cardinal doctrines, <ref target="Pg136">136</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>alleged connection of Jeremiah with its composition, <ref target="Pg139">139</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dirge on the drought, <ref target="Pg056">56</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Douglas, G., <ref target="Pg015">15</ref>, <ref target="Pg145">145</ref>, <ref target="Pg382">382</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Driver: <q>The Book of the Prophet Jeremiah,</q> <ref target="Pg111">111</ref>, <ref target="Pg133">133</ref>, <ref target="Pg147">147</ref>, <ref target="Pg181">181</ref>, <ref target="Pg239">239</ref>, <ref target="Pg296">296</ref>, <ref target="Pg312">312</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Duhm, Professor, <ref target="Pg008">8</ref>, <ref target="Pg015">15</ref>, <ref target="Pg037">37</ref>, <ref target="Pg038">38</ref>, <ref target="Pg040">40</ref>, <ref target="Pg082">82</ref>, <ref target="Pg083">83</ref>, <ref target="Pg091">91</ref>, <ref target="Pg098">98</ref>, <ref target="Pg115">115</ref>, <ref target="Pg166">166</ref>, <ref target="Pg194">194</ref>, <ref target="Pg222">222</ref>, <ref target="Pg227">227</ref>, <ref target="Pg243">243</ref>, <ref target="Pg244">244</ref>, <ref target="Pg257">257</ref>, <ref target="Pg268">268</ref>, <ref target="Pg269">269</ref>, <ref target="Pg276">276</ref>, <ref target="Pg287">287</ref>, <ref target="Pg295">295</ref>, <ref target="Pg300">300</ref>, <ref target="Pg312">312</ref>, <ref target="Pg329">329</ref>, <ref target="Pg375">375</ref>, etc.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ebed-Melech, <ref target="Pg281">281</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Edghill, <ref target="Pg159">159</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Egypt, <ref target="Pg077">77</ref>, <ref target="Pg105">105</ref>, <ref target="Pg234">234</ref>, <ref target="Pg310">310</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ephraim, <ref target="Pg072">72</ref>, <ref target="Pg297">297</ref>, <ref target="Pg299">299</ref>, <ref target="Pg304">304</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Erbt, <ref target="Pg038">38</ref>, <ref target="Pg048">48</ref>, <ref target="Pg133">133</ref>, <ref target="Pg190">190</ref>, <ref target="Pg227">227</ref>, <ref target="Pg256">256</ref>, <ref target="Pg268">268</ref>, <ref target="Pg314">314</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Euphrates, <ref target="Pg184">184</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ewald, <ref target="Pg184">184</ref>, <ref target="Pg222">222</ref>, <ref target="Pg268">268</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Farah, Wady, <ref target="Pg184">184</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Freedom, the Divine, <ref target="Pg186">186</ref>, <ref target="Pg237">237</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Future Life, no hope of, <ref target="Pg138">138</ref>, <ref target="Pg240">240</ref>, <ref target="Pg334">334</ref>, <ref target="Pg340">340</ref>, <ref target="Pg380">380</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gedaliah, <ref target="Pg276">276</ref>, <ref target="Pg291">291</ref>, <ref target="Pg292">292</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>assassination, <ref target="Pg307">307</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gidroth-Chimham, <ref target="Pg308">308</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Giesebrecht, <ref target="Pg038">38</ref>, <ref target="Pg048">48</ref>, <ref target="Pg147">147</ref>, <ref target="Pg155">155</ref>, <ref target="Pg181">181</ref>, <ref target="Pg227">227</ref>, <ref target="Pg257">257</ref>, <ref target="Pg268">268</ref>, <ref target="Pg287">287</ref>, <ref target="Pg312">312</ref>, <ref target="Pg380">380</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gilead, <ref target="Pg068">68</ref>, <ref target="Pg069">69</ref>, <ref target="Pg201">201</ref>, <ref target="Pg224">224</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gillies, Rev. J. R., <ref target="Pg111">111</ref>, <ref target="Pg146">146</ref>, <ref target="Pg147">147</ref>, <ref target="Pg181">181</ref>, <ref target="Pg190">190</ref>, <ref target="Pg222">222</ref>, <ref target="Pg268">268</ref>, <ref target="Pg287">287</ref>, <ref target="Pg294">294</ref>, <ref target="Pg312">312</ref>, <ref target="Pg324">324</ref>, <ref target="Pg375">375</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>God, man, and the new covenant, <ref target="Pg350">350</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grotius, <ref target="Pg007">7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hananiah, <ref target="Pg251">251</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hebrew poetry, <ref target="Pg033">33</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heine, <ref target="Pg036">36</ref>, <ref target="Pg040">40</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Herder, <ref target="Pg034">34</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Herodotus, <ref target="Pg073">73</ref>, <ref target="Pg206">206</ref>, <ref target="Pg382">382</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hilḳiah, <ref target="Pg066">66</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hinnom, <ref target="Pg185">185</ref>, <ref target="Pg191">191</ref>, <ref target="Pg195">195</ref> (Topheth).</l>
</lg>

<pb n='392'/><anchor id='Pg392'/>

<lg>
<l>Hosea, <ref target="Pg004">4</ref>, <ref target="Pg044">44</ref>, etc.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hugo, Victor, <ref target="Pg167">167</ref>, <ref target="Pg230">230</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Isaiah, <ref target="Pg004">4</ref>, <ref target="Pg085">85</ref>, <ref target="Pg266">266</ref>, <ref target="Pg279">279</ref>, <ref target="Pg319">319</ref>, <ref target="Pg351">351</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ishmael (the fanatic), <ref target="Pg307">307</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='index-jeconiah'/>
<l>Jeconiah (Konyahu), <ref target="Pg224">224</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jehoahaz, <ref target="Pg164">164</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jehoiachin, <ref target="Pg176">176</ref> (<hi rend='italic'>see</hi>
<ref target="index-jeconiah">Jeconiah</ref>).</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jehoiakim, <ref target="Pg144">144</ref>, <ref target="Pg165">165</ref>, <ref target="Pg195">195</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jeremiah, personality, <ref target="Pg004">4</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>biography, <ref target="Pg026">26</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as poet, <ref target="Pg031">31</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as prose writer, <ref target="Pg040">40</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his youth and his call, <ref target="Pg066">66</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>range of his mission, <ref target="Pg079">79</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>prophet to the nations, <ref target="Pg079">79</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>carrier of the Word of the Lord, <ref target="Pg083">83</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>charge in visions, <ref target="Pg084">84</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in the reign of Josiah, <ref target="Pg089">89</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his Oracles, <ref target="Pg089">89</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>alleged pessimism, <ref target="Pg108">108</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Oracles on the Scythians, <ref target="Pg110">110</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>settlement in Jerusalem, <ref target="Pg134">134</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>alleged connection with the composition of Deuteronomy, <ref target="Pg139">139</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>attitude to its ethics and to the written law, and to sacrifices, <ref target="Pg143">143</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>difficulties as to <q>the Covenant,</q> <ref target="Pg144">144</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conspiracy against, <ref target="Pg146">146</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>address rebuking the people, <ref target="Pg147">147</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>contrasts to the teaching of Deuteronomy, <ref target="Pg153">153</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>enmity of the priests, <ref target="Pg168">168</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>prediction of the ruin of the Temple, <ref target="Pg168">168</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Rolls, <ref target="Pg178">178</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>address prophesying judgment upon Judah, <ref target="Pg179">179</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>parables, <ref target="Pg183">183</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>arrest, <ref target="Pg191">191</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Oracles on the Edge of Doom, <ref target="Pg195">195</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>hopeful prophecies, <ref target="Pg236">236</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>vision of the good and bad figs, <ref target="Pg238">238</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Letter to the Exiles, <ref target="Pg241">241</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>treatment of the 'prophets' in Jerusalem, <ref target="Pg245">245</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>removal and restoration of the sacred vessels, <ref target="Pg250">250</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>controversy with other prophets, <ref target="Pg258">258</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his prophesying vindicated by history, <ref target="Pg259">259</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>arrested and flogged, <ref target="Pg275">275</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>controversy as to suggested surrender, <ref target="Pg276">276</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>charged with treason and cast into cistern, <ref target="Pg280">280</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rescue by Ebed-melech, <ref target="Pg281">281</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>appeal by the King, <ref target="Pg282">282</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>The Book of Hope,</q> <ref target="Pg286">286</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>what befel Jeremiah when the city was taken, <ref target="Pg291">291</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>carried off in chains to Ramah and there released, <ref target="Pg292">292</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>prophecies of the physical restoration of Israel and Judah, <ref target="Pg302">302</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>carried off to Egypt, <ref target="Pg310">310</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Oracle concerning the Jews in Egypt, <ref target="Pg311">311</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the story of his soul, <ref target="Pg317">317</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>the Weeping Prophet,</q> <ref target="Pg318">318</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>voice of pain and protest, <ref target="Pg318">318</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his irony and scorn, <ref target="Pg321">321</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fluid and quick temper, <ref target="Pg332">332</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>poet's heart for the beauties of nature and domestic life, <ref target="Pg334">334</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>no hope of another life, <ref target="Pg334">334</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>faith in his predestination, <ref target="Pg335">335</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrifice of self, <ref target="Pg341">341</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>foreshadowing the sufferings of Christ for men, <ref target="Pg349">349</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>revelations of God subjective, <ref target="Pg352">352</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a God of deeds, <ref target="Pg354">354</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Jeremiah's monotheism, <ref target="Pg356">356</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>brooding on the wrath of the Lord, <ref target="Pg358">358</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the love of God, <ref target="Pg361">361</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Divine power in nature, <ref target="Pg365">365</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>man and the new covenant, <ref target="Pg367">367</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>readings of the heart of man, <ref target="Pg370">370</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the individual as the direct object of the Divine grace and discipline, <ref target="Pg372">372</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the prophecy of the new covenant, <ref target="Pg374">374</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jeremiah (Book of), <ref target="Pg009">9</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>questions of authorship, <ref target="Pg019">19</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Rolls, <ref target="Pg023">23</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Exilic and Post-Exilic additions, <ref target="Pg029">29</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>poetical passages, <ref target="Pg031">31</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>critical text, <ref target="Pg156">156</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>evidence for revelation by argument, <ref target="Pg161">161</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jerusalem, <ref target="Pg113">113</ref>, <ref target="Pg125">125</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>invested by Nebuchadrezzar, <ref target="Pg234">234</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Temple and Palace burned, <ref target="Pg235">235</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Jeremiah's activity and sufferings during the siege, <ref target="Pg267">267</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his pronouncements of surrender, <ref target="Pg267">267</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='393'/><anchor id='Pg393'/>

<lg>
<l>Job, Book of, <ref target="Pg049">49</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Johanan-ben-Kareah, <ref target="Pg308">308</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Josiah, <ref target="Pg075">75</ref>, <ref target="Pg162">162</ref>, etc.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Knox, John, <ref target="Pg266">266</ref>, <ref target="Pg272">272</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>König, <ref target="Pg145">145</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Kurzer Hand-Commentar,</q> <ref target="Pg038">38</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lees, Dr. John: <q>The German Lyric,</q> <ref target="Pg033">33</ref>, <ref target="Pg042">42</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Love, the Divine, <ref target="Pg106">106</ref>, <ref target="Pg348">348</ref>, <ref target="Pg356">356</ref>, etc.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lowth, Bishop: <q>De Sacra Poesi Hebræorum,</q> <ref target="Pg033">33</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Magor-Missabib, <ref target="Pg192">192</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Man and the new covenant, <ref target="Pg367">367</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marti, <ref target="Pg155">155</ref>, <ref target="Pg184">184</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>McCurdy, <ref target="Pg111">111</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>McFadyen, J. E., <ref target="Pg184">184</ref>, <ref target="Pg222">222</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Megiddo, battle of, <ref target="Pg163">163</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Metrical Questions, vii, <ref target="Pg032">32-53</ref> and <hi rend='italic'>passim</hi>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mispah, <ref target="Pg292">292</ref>, <ref target="Pg308">308</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Misraim (Egypt), <ref target="Pg094">94</ref>, etc.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nabopolassar, <ref target="Pg175">175</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nebuchadrezzar, <ref target="Pg110">110</ref>, <ref target="Pg126">126</ref>, <ref target="Pg175">175</ref>, <ref target="Pg292">292</ref>, etc.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nebusaradan, <ref target="Pg235">235</ref>, <ref target="Pg291">291</ref>, <ref target="Pg292">292</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nĕcoh, <ref target="Pg163">163</ref>, <ref target="Pg175">175</ref>, <ref target="Pg384">384</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nineveh, Fall of, <ref target="Pg162">162</ref>, <ref target="Pg163">163</ref>, <ref target="Pg175">175</ref>, <ref target="Pg383">383</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nineveh, <ref target="Pg175">175</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Noph (Memphis), <ref target="Pg094">94</ref>, <ref target="Pg311">311</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Omnipresence, the Divine, <ref target="Pg256">256</ref>, <ref target="Pg366">366</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oracles on the Edge of Doom, <ref target="Pg060">60</ref>, <ref target="Pg195">195</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Parable of the Potter, <ref target="Pg082">82</ref>, <ref target="Pg185">185</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Parables, <ref target="Pg183">183</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pashhur, <ref target="Pg191">191</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pathros, <ref target="Pg311">311</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Patience, the Divine, <ref target="Pg187">187-189</ref>, <ref target="Pg217">217</ref>, <ref target="Pg237">237</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peake, Prof., <ref target="Pg146">146</ref>, <ref target="Pg147">147</ref>, <ref target="Pg184">184</ref>, <ref target="Pg222">222</ref>, <ref target="Pg268">268</ref>, <ref target="Pg273">273</ref>, <ref target="Pg274">274</ref>, <ref target="Pg279">279</ref>, <ref target="Pg287">287</ref>, <ref target="Pg293">293</ref>, <ref target="Pg312">312</ref>, <ref target="Pg375">375</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Predestination, <ref target="Pg078">78</ref>, <ref target="Pg186">186</ref>, <ref target="Pg335">335</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prophets. Personality of the, <ref target="Pg003">3</ref>; <hi rend='italic'>see also</hi> <ref target="Pg245">245-266</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Qînah (metre), <ref target="Pg037">37</ref>, <ref target="Pg039">39</ref>, <ref target="Pg044">44</ref>, <ref target="Pg244">244</ref>, <ref target="Pg283">283</ref>, <ref target="Pg295">295</ref>, <ref target="Pg297">297</ref>, etc.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Queen, or Host, of Heaven, <ref target="Pg195">195</ref>, <ref target="Pg234">234</ref>, <ref target="Pg313">313</ref>, <ref target="Pg314">314</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ramah, <ref target="Pg070">70</ref>, <ref target="Pg292">292</ref>, <ref target="Pg297">297</ref>, <ref target="Pg303">303</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rechabites, the, <ref target="Pg193">193</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Renan, <ref target="Pg308">308</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rothstein, <ref target="Pg222">222</ref>, <ref target="Pg294">294</ref>, <ref target="Pg312">312</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sacrifice, <ref target="Pg130">130</ref>, <ref target="Pg152">152</ref>, <ref target="Pg155">155-159</ref>, <ref target="Pg299">299</ref>, <ref target="Pg341">341</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saintsbury, George: <q>History of English Prosody,</q> <ref target="Pg036">36</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schmidt, Professor, <ref target="Pg024">24</ref>, <ref target="Pg025">25</ref>, <ref target="Pg111">111</ref>, <ref target="Pg382">382</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schweich Lectures, <ref target="Pg034">34</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scythians, the, <ref target="Pg073">73</ref>, <ref target="Pg082">82</ref>, <ref target="Pg110">110</ref>, <ref target="Pg381">381</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ṣedekiah, <ref target="Pg232">232</ref>, and <hi rend='italic'>passim</hi> to <ref target="Pg282">282</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shakespeare, <ref target="Pg036">36</ref>, <ref target="Pg047">47</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shiloh, <ref target="Pg072">72</ref>, <ref target="Pg149">149</ref>, <ref target="Pg170">170</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Skinner, Rev. John, D.D.: his <q>Prophecy and Religion, Studies in the Life of Jeremiah,</q> <ref target="Pg007">7</ref>, <ref target="Pg103">103</ref>, <ref target="Pg111">111</ref>, <ref target="Pg129">129</ref>, <ref target="Pg133">133</ref>, <ref target="Pg145">145</ref>, <ref target="Pg146">146</ref>, <ref target="Pg166">166</ref>, <ref target="Pg169">169</ref>, <ref target="Pg181">181</ref>, <ref target="Pg190">190</ref>, <ref target="Pg222">222</ref>, <ref target="Pg227">227</ref>, <ref target="Pg237">237</ref>, <ref target="Pg268">268</ref>, <ref target="Pg279">279</ref>, <ref target="Pg284">284</ref>, <ref target="Pg292">292</ref>, <ref target="Pg307">307</ref>, <ref target="Pg375">375</ref>, <ref target="Pg383">383</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Slavery, <ref target="Pg235">235</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>proposed emancipation, <ref target="Pg273">273</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smith, H. P., <ref target="Pg147">147</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smith, W. Robertson, <ref target="Pg015">15</ref>, <ref target="Pg159">159</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Snouck Hurgronje: <q>Mekka,</q> <ref target="Pg037">37</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stade, B., <ref target="Pg267">267</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tahpanhes (Daphne), <ref target="Pg094">94</ref>, <ref target="Pg310">310</ref>, <ref target="Pg311">311</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tchekov, <ref target="Pg198">198</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thackeray, St. John: his <q>The Septuagint and Jewish Worship,</q> <ref target="Pg014">14</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='394'/><anchor id='Pg394'/>

<lg>
<l>Thomson, Rev. W. R., <ref target="Pg111">111</ref>, <ref target="Pg140">140</ref>, <ref target="Pg146">146</ref>, <ref target="Pg268">268</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Torah, the, <ref target="Pg153">153</ref>, etc.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Urijahu, <ref target="Pg173">173</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wady Farah, <ref target="Pg184">184</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wellhausen, <ref target="Pg005">5</ref>, <ref target="Pg146">146</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Winckler: <q>A.T. Untersuchungen,</q> <ref target="Pg142">142</ref>, <ref target="Pg176">176</ref>, <ref target="Pg382">382</ref>, <ref target="Pg383">383</ref>.</l>
</lg>

</div>
</body>
<back rend="page-break-before: right">
  <div id="footnotes">
    <index index="toc" />
    <index index="pdf" />
    <head>Footnotes</head>
    <divGen type="footnotes"/>
  </div>
  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <divGen type="pgfooter" />
  </div>
</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>
